Lab: Collections
===================================

Goals for this lab:
----------------------

-  Read a text file.
-  Work with loops.
-  Work with a Dictionary and a List.
-  Retrieve a random entry.

Overview
~~~~~~~~~~

This project has a program called ``We-Give-Answer!`` as in :repsrc:`fake_help_verbose/fake_help_verbose.cs` 
that has some fake AI/virtual assistant capacity. The program is working but all the response texts are 
hard-coded in the program and that is not ideal for maintenance. Your team want to use external text 
files so that you can manage response texts with ease. For that your colleagues have prepared a file 
called ``fake_help.cs``. **Your job is to complete this new program**. 

Your team has designed this new program to be structured a little differently from the verbose version. 
A helper class ``file_util.cs`` (:repsrc:`file_util.cs <dict_lab_stub/file_util.cs>`) is added to 
contain the functionalities of handling files. You need to work on the file to provide such functionalities. 
You will need to complete short versions of methods ``GetParagraphs`` and ``GetDictionary`` in ``file_util.cs``. 


Steps
-----------------

Download files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Download the following files by going to the github repositories and use the download raw files to download 
individual files and move them to the project folder:

#. fake_help_verbose (:repsrc:`fake_help_verbose`), 
#. fake_help.cs (:repsrc:`dict_lab_stub`) along with the following files:
#. file_util.cs
#. help_not_defaults.txt
#. help_not_responses.txt
#. help_not_responses2.txt, and 
#. the UI class (``ui.cs`` at :repsrc:`ui`) so you don't have to write the user input code. 

Note that some of the files are data files (\*.txt). 

.. note:: 

   For now, you may keep the namespace ``IntroCS`` and change them later for organization purpose. 


fake_help_verbose.cs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Open the working program, the downloaded take_help_verbose.cs (:repsrc:`fake_help_verbose/fake_help_verbose.cs`) and
look at how the methods ``Main``, ``Response``, ``GetParagraphs()`` and ``GetDictionary()`` work together 
to provide the **Fake Help** functionality.

.. note:: 
   To run the program, you need to change the ``Main``() methods in fake_help.cs to something else such as ``main`` 
   as you are allowed to have only one Main in a program and both fake_help.cs and fake_help_verbose have a ``Main`` 
   method.

All the strings for the responses are pre-coded for you there, but if
you were writing your own methods, it would be a pain. There is all the
repetitious code to make multiline strings and then to add to the
``List`` and ``Dictionary``. That's why you will later provide simple versatile methods to
fill a ``List<string>`` or a ``Dictionary<string, string>`` so that you only need
you to write the string data itself into a text file, with the only
overhead being a few extra newlines. 

For now, run the program to see how this fake AI/virtual look like:

.. code-block:: none

   PS C:\Users\tcn85\workspace\introcscs\Ch09CollectionLab> dotnet run
   Welcome to We-Give-Answers!               ### this is the prompt for user action
   What do you have to say?
   
   Enter 'bye' to end our session.           ### input "bye" to escape the loop
   > 

Look back into the code, in the ``Main`` method, you see that:

.. code-block:: none

   public static void Main(string[] args)
      {
         List<string> guessList = GetParagraphs();                ### create a filled string list guessList from GetParagraph
         Dictionary<string, string> responses = GetDictionary();  ### create a filled dictionary response from GetDictionary

         string prompt = "\n> ";                                  ### create a string variable and initialize it as prompt
         Console.WriteLine(@"Welcome to We-Give-Answers!          ### prompt user input; 
   What do you have to say?");                                       ### the @ means the string is a verbatim string literal; escape sequence is ignored
         Console.Write("\nEnter 'bye' to end our session.");      ### \n means print a new line

         string fromUser;                                         ### create another string variable
         do                                                       ### use do-while loop to loop at least once and keep looping
         {                                                        ### until the condition is met
            fromUser = UI.PromptLine(prompt).ToLower().Trim();    ### user UI's PromptLine to read user input and save it to fromUser
            if (fromUser != "bye") {                              ### condition required here because this is first run
               string answer = Response(fromUser, guessList, responses);  ### call Response(); throw the args to Response()
               Console.WriteLine('\n' + answer);                  ### print returned string from Response in a new line
            }
         } while (fromUser != "bye");                             ### when user input == "bye", terminate t while loop

          Console.WriteLine(@"                                    ### Good bye with verbatim string literal
   We-Give-Answers
   thanks you for your patronage.
   Call again if we can help you
   with any other problem!");
      }


Both the ``GetParagraphs()`` and ``GetDictionary()`` in this class actually does one 
thing: **To add texts to the List/Dictionary variables**:

**The GetParagraph() method:** returns a string list of paragraphs. 

.. code-block:: none

      public static List<string> GetParagraphs()          ### when called, return a string list
      {
         List<string> all = new List<string>();          ### create the new "all" string list variable 
         all.Add(@"No other customer has ever complained ### add string to the variable using "Add()"
about this before.  What is your system
configuration?");
         all.Add(@"That sounds odd. Could you describe   ### add string to the variable using "Add()"
that problem in more detail?");
         ...
         all.Add("Could you elaborate on that?");        ### add string to the variable using "Add()"   
         return all;                                     ### return the string list variable all


**The GetDictionary method:** 

.. code-block:: 

      public static Dictionary<string, string> GetDictionary()
      {
         Dictionary<string, string> d = new Dictionary<string, string>();
         d["crash"] = @"Well, it never crashes on our system.
It must have something to do with your system.
Tell me more about your configuration.";
         d["slow"] = @"I think this has to do with your hardware.


**The ``Response`` method:**

.. code-block:: none

   public static string Response(string fromUser, List<string> guessList,
                                    Dictionary<string, string> responses)
   {
      char[] sep = "\t !@#$%^&*()_+{}|[]\\:\";<>?,./".ToCharArray(); ### define separators
      string[] words = fromUser.ToLower().Split(sep);                ### make fromUser lower case and split the words
      foreach (string word in words) {                               ### loop through the words
         if (responses.ContainsKey(word)) {                          ### if a word (keyword) matches a "responses" dictionary key
            return responses[word];            }         }           ### return the value (msg) by that key
      return guessList[rand.Next(guessList.Count)];                  ### if the word is not a key in "response", return a random "guess" 
   }



fake_help.cs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can look in the lab project at the first data file:
:repsrc:`help_not_defaults.txt <dict_lab_stub/help_not_defaults.txt>`, 
and the beginning is shown below:  

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/dict_lab_stub/help_not_defaults.txt
   :language: none
   :lines: 1-15

You can see that it includes the data for the welcome
and goodbye strings followed by all the data to go in the ``List`` of random answers.

One complication is that many of these strings take up several lines, in what we call
a *paragraph*.  We follow a standard convention for putting paragraphs into plain text: 
Put a blank line after a paragraph to mark its end. As you can see, that is how 
:repsrc:`help_not_defaults.txt <dict_lab_stub/help_not_defaults.txt>` is set up. 

- The ``StreamReader`` is set up to read from the right file.  
- The the ``FileUtil`` methods ``ReadParagraph``, ``GetParagraphs``, and ``GetDictionary`` are used to provide
  the text data needed. 


All of the additions you need to make are in the bodies of method 
definitions in the class ``FileUtil``.  Look back to ``Main`` in ``fake_help.cs`` to
see how the methods from ``FileUtil`` are actually used: 
.. definitions in the class ``FileUtil``.  Look back to ``Main`` in ``FakeAdvise`` to


Look in your copy of ``fake_help.cs``: 

- It creates the ``List`` ``guessList`` and the ``Dictionary`` ``responses`` 
  using more general functions that you need to fill in.
- The stubs are put in the class ``FileUtil`` for easy reuse. 
- The ``Main`` calls these methods and chooses the files to read.
- The results will look the same as the original program to the user, but the second version will 
  be easier for a programmer to read and generalize: It will be easier in other situations 
  where you want lots of canned data in your program (like in a game you might write).
- The stub should run as is (mostly saying things are not implemented).
- Test out your work at every stage!
  

ReadParagraph
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first method to complete in 
:repsrc:`file_util.cs <dict_lab_stub/file_util.cs>`
is useful by itself and later for use in the 
``GetParagraphs`` and ``GetDictionary`` that you will complete.  See the stub:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/dict_lab_stub/file_util.cs
   :start-after: ReadParagraph chunk
   :end-before: chunk
   :dedent: 6

The first call to ``ReadParagraph``, using the file illustrated above, should
return the following (showing the escape codes for the newlines)::

    "Welcome to We-Give-Answers!\nWhat do you have to say?\n"

and then the reader should be set to read the goodbye paragraph
(the next time ``ReadParagraph`` is called).

To code, you can read lines one at a time, and append them to the part of the
paragraph read so far. There is one thing to watch out for: The
``ReadLine`` function *throws away* the following newline (``"\n"``) in the input. You
need to preserve it, so be sure to explicitly add a newline, back onto
your paragraph string after each nonempty line is added. The returned
paragraph should end with a single newline. 

Throw away the empty line
in the input after the paragraph. Make sure you stop after reading
the empty line.  It is very important that you advance the reader
to the right place, to be ready to read the next paragraph. 

Be careful of a pitfall with files:  You can only read a given chunk once:  
If you read again, with the exact same syntax,
you get the *next* line of the file.  The ``ReadLine`` method
has the *side effect* of advancing the reading position in the file.

**Testing**: This first short ``ReadParagraph`` function should actually be most of 
the code that you write for the lab!  The program is set up so you can immediately
run the program and test ``ReadParagraph``:  It is called to read in the welcome string
and the goodbye string for the program, so if those come correctly to the screen, you
can advance to the next two parts.  


GetParagraphs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since you have ``ReadParagraph`` at your disposal, you now only need to
insert a *few remaining lines of code* to complete the next method
``GetParagraphs``, that reads to the end of the file, and likely
processes more than one paragraph.  

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/dict_lab_stub/file_util.cs
   :start-after: GetParagraphs chunk
   :end-before: chunk

Look again at 
:repsrc:`help_not_defaults.txt <dict_lab_stub/help_not_defaults.txt>`, 
to see how the data is set up.

This lab requires very few lines of code. Be sure to read the examples
and instructions carefully (several times). A lot of ideas get packed
into the few lines!

**Testing**: After writing ``GetParagraphs``, the random
responses in the lab project program should work as the user enters lines in the program.


GetDictionary
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The last stub to complete in :repsrc:`file_util.cs <dict_lab_stub/file_util.cs>` 
is ``GetDictionary``.  Its
stub also takes a ``StreamReader`` as parameter.  In 
``Main`` this function is called to read from
:repsrc:`help_not_responses.txt <dict_lab_stub/help_not_responses.txt>`.  
Here are the first few lines:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/dict_lab_stub/help_not_responses.txt
   :language: none
   :lines: 1-15

Here is the stub of the function to complete, reading such data:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/dict_lab_stub/file_util.cs
   :start-after: GetDictionary chunk
   :end-before: chunk
   :dedent: 6

**Testing**: 
When you complete this function, the program should behave 
just like the earlier
verbose version with the hard-coded data, using a dictionary value
if it finds the right key, 
or choosing a random response if there is no key match.

Be careful to distinguish the data file 
:repsrc:`help_not_responses.txt <dict_lab_stub/help_not_responses.txt>` 
from
:repsrc:`help_not_responses2.txt <dict_lab_stub/help_not_responses2.txt>`, 
used in the extra credit option.

This should also be an extremely short amount of coding!  
Think of following through the data file, and get the corresponding 
sequence of instructions to handle the data in the exact same sequence. 

Show the program output to a TA (after the extra credit if you like).

.. Extra credit 
.. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
    
.. #.  (20%) Modify ReadParagragh so it *also* works if the paragraph ends 
..     at the end of the file, with no blank line after it, or if the line after
..     the paragraph only has whitespace characters.  Both changes are good to
..     bullet-proof the code, since
..     the added or removed whitespace is hard to see in print.
    
.. #.  (20%) The crude word classification scheme would recognize "crash", but not
..     "crashed" or "crashes".  You could make whole file entries
..     for each key variation, repeating the value paragraph.  
..     A concise approach is to use a data file
..     like :repsrc:`help_not_responses2.txt <dict_lab_stub/help_not_responses2.txt>`.  
..     Here are the first few lines:

..     .. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/dict_lab_stub/help_not_responses2.txt
..        :language: none
..        :lines: 1-15

..     The line that used to have one key now may have several blank-separated keys.

..     Here is how the documentation for ``GetDictionary`` should be changed:

..     .. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/dict_lab_stub/file_util.cs
..        :start-after: Extra credit documentation
..        :end-before: }
..        :dedent: 6

..     Modify the lab project to use this file effectively:  Find
..     "help_not_responses.txt" on line 22 in ``Main``.  Change it to
..     "help_not_responses2.txt" (inserting '2'), so ``Main`` reads it.

..     In your test of the program, be sure to use several of the keys that apply to the
..     same response, and show to your TA.
