.. index:: function; definition

.. _A-First-Function:

Introduction
==============

Methods/functions are reusable, callable, and customizable piece of code 
in a computer program. When a function is a part of a class, 
it's called a method. In OOP languages, functions are called methods because they are 
always declared inside and operated through designated classes. It is, therefore, 
by definition, more accurate to call these subroutines methods rather than functions in C# 
since C# is an OOP language. However, when discussing the construct of subroutine 
in general, the general term function seems appropriate and you will see people use the terms 
interchangeably from time to time.


.. note:: 
   In C# or other object oriented programming (OOP) languages, methods 
   are associated with a class. In other languages, you may hear the term function. 
   A function is similar to a method, but it is not tied to a class. Due to the 
   similarity in overall usage, it is common to use the terms methods and functions as synonyms.

You have seen the Main() method in the C# console app programs that you generated 
using the .NET template. In C#, the Main() method is the application’s entry point. 
When the application is run, execution begins at the start of the Main() method. 

Up until this unit, you wrote all code in the main method, but now you 
will be creating new methods that can be called by the main method. Methods are 
**named** code blocks that can be reused (called) whenever we needed. Methods are an 
**abstraction** of your code because the methods abstracting away the details (you use 
the methods by their names only) and that serves to organize your code by function 
and reduce the repetition of code. In addition, it helps with debugging and 
maintenance since changes to that block of code only need to happen in one place. 
Here are some of the main reasons to use multiple methods in your programs:

- Reducing Complexity: Divide a problem into sub-problems to solve it a piece at a time.
- Reusing Code: Avoid repetition of code.
- Maintainability and Debugging: Smaller methods are easier to debug and understand.

When you see duplicate lines of code, that is a signal for you to make a new method. 
A method is a named set of statements. When we want to execute the statements, we 
call the method using its name. In a subsequent lesson you will create methods 
that are called using an object, referred to as **instance methods** or object methods. 
The methods in this unit are called without an object, so they are **static methods**. 
Static methods are also referred to as class methods.

Some important characteristics of methods/functions are:

- We design methods to be **reusable** subroutines perform certain actions so that 
  we do not have to write the same/similar code repetitively. 
- In general, a method should do a **single thing**. You then combine a sequence to perform desired actions. 
- Methods will not run until it is **called**. We say we are making a "function call" 
  or "method call" when we invoke/use the subroutine. 
- When calling a method, we often pass data into the method and we usually 
  design the method to **return** values when called. 
- The data that are passed to the method are called **arguments** and the variables 
  defined for the argument intake are called **parameters** (although they are often 
  not differentiated from each others). [#f1]_

Observing a C# method: The Main method in a console application is 
a method and it looks like the follows when you generate it 
with ``dotnet new console --use-program-main``:

.. code-block:: csharp
   :linenos: 
   :emphasize-lines: 5-8

   namespace HelloWorld;

   class Program
   {
      static void Main(string[] args)
      {
         Console.WriteLine("Hello, World!");
      }
   }

The Main method, however, is unique by design because it is designated to be the enter point of an 
application. Although you can write code in the Main method, you will learn how to write methods 
in addition to, and outside of, the Main method to extend the functionality of your code.  




.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#f1] In C#, when methods of a type are nested in another member, they are 
   called *local functions*. 


