Method Signature and Method Call
==================================


Method Signature: The Recipe
------------------------------

The first method you have encountered in C# is the Main method, in which *Main* is 
the name that you can to refer to this set of statements. A Main method is special 
because it is designated as the only entry point of a C# application and therefore 
the first method to be invoked in a class [#f1]_. 

Note that the **Main method** is contained in a **class** (Program), which is a 
standard arrangement for OOP languages. 
You define a method by writing the method’s **header** and **body**. The header is 
also called a **method signature**. [#f6]_ When defining methods, you follow a recipe 
(standard syntax) to specify the **method signatures**. The 
standard syntax template for method signatures is as follows: [#f4]_

.. code-block:: none
   
   [Access Modifier] [static modifier] [Return Type] MethodName(Parameter List)
   {
      // Method Body: a set of statements enclosed in curly braces { }
   }

In this template, the signature include the following parts:

.. list-table:: Method Signatures
   :widths: 10 90
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Signature 
     - Description
   * - Access Level 
     - Optional. This determines visibility of methods between classes, and whether 
       or not it can instantiate new objects. Since our methods in this chapter are limited 
       to this class, we will leave them off for now.
   * - Static modifier
     - Define the method as a static member method of the class. When not defined as 
       static, it is an instance member. [#f3]_
   * - Return Type
     - If the method is returning a value, this indicates what data type it will 
       be. Not all methods return values. Methods that do not return a value have a return 
       type of ``void``.
   * - Method Name
     - The method’s unique ``identifier``. This is what you use to call your method.
   * - Parameter List
     - A parameter is a placeholder for specific data that the method will 
       act upon. Parameters are optional. In these cases, the ``()`` are still part of the method 
       call, but remain empty.
   * - Method Body
     - This is where you code your method. Note it is contained between ``{}``.


With method signatures, you can design methods specifically to your needs. But for now, 
let us analyze the two methods in class TryMethods below to apply our understanding of signatures:

.. code-block:: csharp
   :linenos: 
   :emphasize-lines: 10-11

   using System;                          // the using statement
   class TryMethods                       // class declaration

   {
      static void Main(string[] args)     // static modifier, return modifier, and method name
      {                                   // static: can be invoked directly; void, no return to caller
         MyMethod();                      // method MyMethod (line# 9) is called
      }

      static void MyMethod()              // static modifier, return modifier, and method name 
      {                                   // static: can be invoked directly; void, no return to caller
         Console.WriteLine("IST 1551");   // Method body
         Console.WriteLine("T.Y. Chen");  // Method body
      }

   }

.. note:: 
   You have probably noticed that you can prepare this code by making the **MyMethod** 
   project folder (``mkdir MyMethod``), then creating the project by running ``dotnet new console 
   --use-program-main`` (or just do ``dotnet new console`` then change the code to include 
   the ``Main method``). After that, you run ``code .`` from the terminal to open 
   the project in VS Code and click on Program.cs to edit the source code.


Method Calls & Returns
------------------------

In the preceding code, we add a new method, the ``MyMethod`` method in addition to 
the ``Main`` method. Since the Main method is the 
first method to be invoked by the .NET common 
language runtime (CLR) when the application is started. You then **call** (or **invoke**) 
other methods (making **method calls**) from the Main method. [#f2]_ 

When making a method call, you call it using the method **name** followed by 
**parentheses**. The method header static void chorus() indicates the return type is void and there are no formal parameters between the parentheses, which means you can call the method as shown: 
Note that you build your methods outside of the Main method and you make method calls 
from within the Main method. Namely, you separate the Main method (app the entry point) 
from other methods (functionalities). The purpose of the Main method, therefore, is to 
execute your programs inside the class.

An important feature of functions/methods is that they can **return** values to their 
**callers**. In the example below, you see that you call the method SquareTheNumber() 
from the Main() method using the name of the method and with a parameter. 

.. code-block:: csharp
   :linenos:
   :emphasize-lines: 7, 12-14, 16-18

   
   using System;

   class MainClass {

      static int SquareTheNumber(int num)
      {
         return num * num;    // the value to be returned is given by the expression in the return statement.
      }

      public static void Main (string[] args) {

         int digit = 4;
         int squaredNum = SquareTheNumber(digit);
         int squaredAndSummed = squaredNum + SquareTheNumber(digit);

         Console.WriteLine(squaredNum);
         Console.WriteLine(squaredAndSummed);
         Console.WriteLine(SquareTheNumber(5));

      }
   }

The output of the code above would be::

   16
   32
   25

In the preceding code, we see that: 

- line# 7 uses the ``return`` keyword to create a return statement to return 
  the resulted value to the caller. 
- Line# 12 initializes the value of int variable digit to 4
- Line# 13 calls the squaredNum() method with argument digit (4) and save the resulted 
  return value to int variable squaredNum.
- Line# 14 add squaredNum and add it to the return value of the method call with argument value of 4.

Since methods can return data, and all data in C# is typed, 
there must be a type given for the value returned. Note that in the preceding 
code the method header does not start with ``static void``.  
In place of ``void`` is ``int``.  The ``void`` in method headers
mean nothing was returned. The ``int`` here means that a value *is*
returned and its type is ``int``.


Flow of execution
-------------------

In terms of the construct of **sequential processing**, functions/methods 
alter code execution order in several ways: by statements not
being executed as the definition is first read, and then when the
method is called during execution, jumping to the method code,
and back at the the end of the method execution. [#f7]_

A class can contain multiple methods. It can be tempting to think the 
methods are executed in the order they appear in the class, but this is 
not the case. A program always begins at the first statement in the Main 
method. Each statement in the main is executed sequentially, one at a 
time, until you reach a method call. A method call causes the program 
execution to jump to the first line of the called method. 
Each statement in the called method is then executed in order. 
When the called method is done, the program returns back to the 
main method. [#f8]_

In other words, the order in which the method definition code blocks does 
not matter to C#. It is a human choice. One good practice is to show 
``Main`` first. This means a human reading in order gets an overview 
of what is happening by looking at Main, but does not know the details 
until reading the definitions of other methods.





	
.. [#f1] Note that if you have more than one Main method in you have to use the 
   `StartupObject <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language
   -reference/compiler-options/advanced#mainentrypoint-or-startupobject>`_ 
   compiler option to specify which Main method to use as the entry point. 
.. [#f2] Main method is required for console and Web apps in .NET.  
.. [#f3] A class has members such as field, properties, and methods. Static 
   members of the class can be used without creating a new instance of the class. 
   For example, we can access the square root method in Math class under the 
   System namespace directly, ``Console.Write(Math.Sqrt(x));``, without using the 
   ``new`` keyword to create a new instance of the Math class. 

.. [#f4] This template and explanation is adopted from https://education.launchcode.org/intro-to-programming-csharp/chapters/methods/method-signatures.html
.. [#f6] Note that, in OOP, method signature usually refers the method name and the type of 
         its parameters (enclosed in parentheses and separated by commas) while the method 
         header means the whole first line of the method definition. Here we use the 
         definition from `Microsoft Learn <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/methods>`_ 
         to make it simple. 
.. [#f7] https://education.launchcode.org/intro-to-programming-csharp/chapters/methods/method-signatures.html#method-calls

.. [#f8] https://runestone.academy/ns/books/published/csjava/Unit5-Writing-Methods/topic-5-1-writing-methods.html