.. index:: function; parameter
   parameter

.. _Method-Parameters:

Method Parameters
==============================

As a young child, you probably heard the “Old MacDonald” song. 
Consider the following two verses:

.. list-table:: Two Verses
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Verse 1
     - Verse 2
   * - Old MacDonald had a farm
     - Old MacDonald had a farm
   * - E-I-E-I-O
     - E-I-E-I-O
   * - And on that farm he had a cow
     - And on that farm he had a duck
   * - E-I-E-I-O
     - E-I-E-I-O
   * - With a moo-moo here
     - With a quack-quack here
   * - And a moo-moo there
     - And a quack-quack there
   * - Here a moo, there a moo
     - Here a quack, there a quack
   * - Everywhere a moo-moo
     - Everywhere a quack-quack
   * - Old MacDonald had a farm
     - Old MacDonald had a farm
   * - E-I-E-I-O
     - E-I-E-I-O


As you can see, the two verses are in most part identical. We can 
probably create a method named ``Verse`` to abstract the 
repetitive lines, but the method will need two  **parameters**, 
which are **placeholders** that allow different values to be **substituted** 
for the animal and noise when the method is called. The method body 
will use the parameter as variables to customize the print statements.

.. code-block:: csharp

   internal class Program
   {
      private static void Main(string[] args)
      {
         // Console.WriteLine("Hello, World!");    // this statement is commented out
         Verse("chicken", "buk");                  // method call
      }

      public static void Verse( String animal, String noise )  // method signature; ``parameters with types``
      {
         Console.WriteLine( "Old MacDonald had a farm" );      // method body starting here
         Console.WriteLine( "E-I-E-I-O" );
         Console.WriteLine( "And on that farm he had a " + animal );
         Console.WriteLine( "E-I-E-I-O" );
         Console.WriteLine( "With a " + noise + "-" + noise + " here") ;
         Console.WriteLine( "And a " + noise + "-" + noise + " there" );
         Console.WriteLine( "Here a " + noise + ", there a " + noise );
         Console.WriteLine( "Everywhere a " + noise + "-" + noise );
         Console.WriteLine( "Old MacDonald had a farm" );
         Console.WriteLine( "E-I-E-I-O" );
      }
   }

By now, you should be pretty familiar with the process of creating a project, 
writing some short code, and test the outcome. As a review, the process should look 
like the follows.

.. code-block:: none

   tychen@mac:~/workspace/introcscs$ mkdir Verse
   tychen@mac:~/workspace/introcscs$ cd Verse/
   tychen@mac:~/workspace/introcscs/Verse$ dotnet new console --use-program-main
   The template "Console App" was created successfully.

   Processing post-creation actions...
   Restoring /Users/tychen/GoogleDrive/workspaces/workspace/introcscs/Verse/Verse.csproj:
   Determining projects to restore...
   Restored /Users/tychen/GoogleDrive/workspaces/workspace/introcscs/Verse/Verse.csproj (in 176 ms).
   Restore succeeded.

   tychen@mac:~/workspace/introcscs/Verse$ code .

In VS Code, you could edit the code and run it from the terminal in VS Code by issuing 
``dotnet run``. Alternatively, you may run your code in terminal and even use editors such 
as ``nano`` to edit your code and run the project in the terminal directly. 

The result of the preceding program should look like the following::

   Old MacDonald had a farm
   E-I-E-I-O
   And on that farm he had a chicken
   E-I-E-I-O
   With a buk-buk here
   And a buk-buk there
   Here a buk, there a buk
   Everywhere a buk-buk
   Old MacDonald had a farm
   E-I-E-I-O


Let us review the standard syntax method signature template::

  Access Modifier [static modifier] Return Type MethodName(``Parameter List``)
  {
    Method Body
  }

In this program, when you call the Verse method, you provide values between the 
parentheses, called ``arguments``, that are copied into the ``parameters`` 
(parameter list in the parentheses after the method name) to  
be used in the method body as ``variables``. If you call the method more than one time 
and supply different arguments, each method call will be run with the arguments 
supplied, such as in::

   Verse( "cow", "moo" );
   Verse( "duck", "quack" );

The main method will call the verse method twice, once for the cow and once for the duck. 

Variable Scope
---------------

A variable may be available for use in some lines of code, but not others. 
The ``scope`` of a variable is the region of the program that is visible, 
which means it is accessible by ``name`` and can be used in the code.

A variable declared inside a method is called a ``local variable``. The scope of 
a local variable is the ``method body`` in which it is declared. You can’t use 
a variable before it is declared, so in fact the scope begins on the line that 
declares the variable and continues until the last line of code in the method or 
block. The local variable’s memory location is only available while the method is 
executing. When the method completes, the memory location is released. 
If you called the method again, the old value is not available.

..  note::
   Only the *value* of the actual parameter is passed, not any
   variable name, so there is *no need* to have a match between a variable name 
   used in an argument and the parameter name.

Static Variables
------------------

You may define *static variables* (variables defined with the word ``static`` inside the class,
but *outside* of any method definition). These variables are visible inside all of your methods in the class. 
Instead of local scope, static variables have *class scope*.
It is good programming practice generally to avoid defining static variables and
instead to put your variables inside methods and explicitly pass
them as parameters where needed. An example for using static variables is constants:
A *constant* is a name that you give a fixed data value to and you do not expect the value to change 
(e.g., Pi).

Method Tracing
-------------------

A method can call other methods to help it do its job. Consider the following code: 

.. code-block:: csharp

  public static void inchesToCentimeters(double i)    // parameter with type
  {
      double c = i * 2.54;
      printInCentimeters(i, c);
  }

  public static void printInCentimeters(double inches, double centimeters)
  {
      Console.WriteLine(inches + "-->" + centimeters);
  }

  public static void main(String[] args)
  {
      inchesToCentimeters(10);
  }

What is printed when the main method is run? 





