Lab 03
====================================================

Return Statement
-----------------

Perform the following for this part of the lab:

- Copy this code into a project called **Returns**. 
- Run the code.
- Study the code and make sure you understand how **every line** of the code works. 
- Write brief comments (after //) at the right of each line to explain what each line is doing 
- Take a screenshot of this piece of code and the result of running the code. 

You probably have used mathematical functions in algebra class, but
they all had calculated values associated with them. For instance
if you defined 

   F(x)=x\ :sup:`2`

then it follows that F(3) is 3\ :sup:`2` = 9, and F(3)+F(4) is
3\ :sup:`2` + 4\ :sup:`2` = 9 + 16 = 25.

Method calls in expressions get replaced during evaluation by the value of the method. 
That's why when we can directly print out (line# 12-13) the result of the method call in the 
following code.   

The corresponding definition and examples in C# would be the
following:

.. code-block:: 
   :linenos:
   :emphasize-lines: 12, 13

   using System;                 //

   class Return1                 //
   {
      static int F(int x)        //
      {
         return x*x;             //
      }

      static void Main()         //
      {
         Console.WriteLine(F(3));         //
         Console.WriteLine(F(3) + F(4));  //
      }
   }

The C# syntax you need to pay attention to is the **return statement**, with the word
``return`` followed by an expression, value, or variable(s). Methods that return values
can be used in expressions (e.g., line# 13: F(3) + F(4)), just like in math class. When an
expression with a method call is evaluated, the method call is
effectively replaced temporarily by its returned value. Inside the
C# method, the value to be returned is given by the
expression in the ``return`` statement.

Since the method returns data, and all data in C# is typed, 
there must be a type given for the value returned. Note that the 
method header does not start with ``static void``.  
In place of ``void`` is ``int``. The ``void`` in earlier method header
meant nothing was returned. The ``int`` here means that a value *is*
returned and its type is ``int``.

After the method ``F`` finishes executing from inside ::

	Console.WriteLine(F(3));

it is as if the statement temporarily became ::

	Console.WriteLine(9);

and similarly when executing ::

	Console.WriteLine(F(3) + F(4)); 

the interpreter first evaluates F(3) and effectively replaces the
call by the returned result, 9, as if the statement temporarily
became ::

	Console.WriteLine(9 + F(4));

and then the interpreter evaluates F(4) and effectively replaces
the call by the returned result, 16, as if the statement
temporarily became ::

	Console.WriteLine(9 + 16);

resulting finally in 25 being calculated and printed.


Return Strings
----------------

C# methods can return any type of data, not just numbers, and
there can be any number of statements executed before the return
statement. Read, follow, and run the example program, which has ``string`` as 
``return type``:

.. code-block:: 
   :linenos:

   using System;           

   class Return2           
   {
      static string LastFirst(string firstName, string lastName)  
      {
         string separator = ", ";                                 
         string result = lastName + separator + firstName;        
         return result;                                           
      }

      static void Main()
      {
         Console.WriteLine(LastFirst("Benjamin", "Franklin"));
         Console.WriteLine(LastFirst("Andrew", "Harrington"));
      }
   }

   // ** write your answer here **

To make sure you can follow the flow of execution with methods 
and return values, do the following:

- Find the line number(s) for each step of code execution of the preceding code 
  as the table below.
- Write the line numbers, comma-separated with one space, as a comment at the end of the code. 
  To denote multiple lines, use dash. 
- Screenshot your code and the result of execution.

.. list-table:: Method Execution and Returns
   :width:10 90
   :header-rows: 1

   * - #
     - Step
   * - 1
     - Start at Main
   * - 2
     - call the function, remembering where to return
   * - 3
     - pass the parameters: firstName = "Benjamin"; lastName = "Franklin"
   * - 4
     - Assign the variable separator the value ", "
   * - 5
     - Assign the variable result the value of lastName + separator + firstName which is "Franklin" + ", " + "Benjamin", which evaluates to "Franklin, Benjamin"
   * - 6
     - Return "Franklin, Benjamin"
   * - 7
     - Use the value returned from the function call so the line effectively becomes Console.WriteLine("Franklin, Benjamin");, so print it.
   * - 8
     - call the function with the new actual parameters, remembering where to return
   * - 9
     - pass the parameters: firstName = "Andrew"; lastName = "Harrington"
   * - 10
     - … calculate and return "Harrington, Andrew"
   * - 11
     - Use the value returned by the function and print "Harrington, Andrew"



.. Lines 12: Start at Main

.. Line 14: call the function, remembering where to return

.. Line 5: pass the parameters: firstName = "Benjamin"; lastName = "Franklin"

.. Line 7: Assign the variable separator the value ", "

.. Line 8: Assign the variable result the value of lastName + separator + firstName which is "Franklin" + ", " + "Benjamin", which evaluates to "Franklin, Benjamin"

.. Line 9: Return "Franklin, Benjamin"

.. Line 14: Use the value returned from the function call so the line effectively becomes Console.WriteLine("Franklin, Benjamin");, so print it.

.. Line 15: call the function with the new actual parameters, remembering where to return

.. Line 5: pass the parameters: firstName = "Andrew"; lastName = "Harrington"

.. Lines 7-9: … calculate and return "Harrington, Andrew"

.. Line 15: Use the value returned by the function and print "Harrington, Andrew"



Return Formatted String
--------------------------

Perform the following for this part of the lab:
- Read the description.
- Copy the code to a project called Addition2a. 
- Run the code. 
- Change variable name a and b to num1 and num2. 
- Run the code.
- Does changing the variable names affect the code execution? Why? Explain in the last line of the code.

It is common to want to construct and immediately print a string,
so having ``Console.Write`` is definitely handy when we want it.
However, sometimes we just want to have the resulting string returned, 
so that we can do something else with it. We can use 
the C# library method ``string.Format``, which does just what we want:  
The parameters have the same form as for ``Console.Write``, 
but the formatted string is *returned*.

.. code-block:: 
   :linenos:
   :emphasize-lines: 8

   using System;

   class Addition2a
   {  // start function chunk
      static string SumProblemString(int x, int y) // with string.Format
      {
         int sum = x + y;
         return string.Format("The sum of {0} and {1} is {2}.", x, y, sum);
      }
      // end function chunk
      static void Main()
      {
         Console.WriteLine(SumProblemString(2, 3));
         Console.WriteLine(SumProblemString(12345, 53579));
         Console.Write("Enter an integer: ");
         int a = int.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
         Console.Write("Enter another integer: ");
         int b = int.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
         Console.WriteLine(SumProblemString(a, b));
      }
   }
   // ** explain here **

Note: The only caveat with ``string.Format`` is that
there is *no* special method corresponding to ``Console.WriteLine``,
with an automatic terminating newline.
You can generate a newline with string.Format:  Remember the
escape code ``"\n"``.  Put it at the end to go on to a new line.

	
Interview String Return
------------------------------------------

Observe the following code:

.. code-block:: 
   :linenos:

   using System;

   class Interview
   {
      static void Main()  // basic prompt/read/write example
      {
         Console.Write ( "Enter the interviewee's name: ");
         string name = Console.ReadLine();
         Console.Write( "Enter the appointment time: ");
         string time = Console.ReadLine();
         Console.WriteLine(name + " has an interview at " + time + ".");
      }
   }

Write a program by that accomplishes the same thing as the preceding code, but 
introduce a method ``InterviewSentence`` that takes name
and time strings as parameters and returns the interview sentence string.

For practice use ``string.Format`` in the method. With this setup you can 
manage input from the user and output to the screen entirely in ``Main``, 
while using ``InterviewSentence`` to generate the sentence that you want 
to *later* print. 

	
Quotient String Return Exercise
---------------------------------

Create :file:`quotient_return.cs` by modifying :file:`quotient_prob.cs` in
:ref:`QuotientFunctionEx` so that the program accomplishes the same
thing, but everywhere: 

* Change the QuotientProblem method into one
  called ``QuotientString`` that merely *returns* the string rather
  than printing the string directly. 
* Have ``Main`` print
  the result of each call to the ``QuotientString`` method.

Use ``string.Format`` to create the sentence that you return.


Birthday Method Exercise
---------------------------

Make your own further change to :repsrc:`birthday4/birthday4.cs` and save it in your
own project as 
``birthday_many.cs``: Add a method call
(but *not* another method *definition*), so Maria gets a verse, in
addition to Emily and Andre. Also print a blank line between
verses. (There are two ways to handle the blank lines: 
You may *either* do this by adding a print line to the
method definition, *or* by adding a print line between all calls to
the method.  Recall that if you give Console.WriteLine an empty
parameter list, it just goes to the next line.)