
Iteration
============================ 

Iteration, or looping, is one of the three basic constructs in computer 
programming (see :ref:`programming-constructs`). The basic purpose of iteration is code repetition, which 
humans usually find difficult but comes very easy for computers. After 
starting, the repetitive execution of a block of code or a set of 
instructions/statements will not stop until certain criterion is met. 
The termination of iteration can be either **count**-controlled (for loops) 
or **condition**-controlled (while loops). In general, when you know 
exactly how many times you are going to loop through a 
block of code, you use the ``for`` loop; otherwise, you would choose a ``while`` loop.

The need for code repetition can be seen from the following code:

.. code-block:: 
  :linenos:
  :emphasize-lines: 8-17

  using System;
  namespace IntroCSCS
  {
      internal class Chapter05
      {
          static void Main(string[] args)
          {
              Console.Write("1 ");
              Console.Write("2 ");
              Console.Write("3 ");
              Console.Write("4 ");
              Console.Write("5 ");
              Console.Write("6 ");
              Console.Write("7 ");
              Console.Write("8 ");
              Console.Write("9 ");
              Console.Write("10 ");
              // output: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
              Console.WriteLine();  
          }
      }
  }

Obviously, to code the print statement repetitively for 10 times is not a efficient use 
of time for a developer, not to mention the repetition could go for more than 10 times. 


C# Iteration Statements
-------------------------

The C# language reference states that iteration 
statements include ``for``, ``foreach``, ``do``, and ``while`` and that the iteration 
statements "repeatedly execute a statement or a block of statements": [#iteration]_

- The ``for`` statement [#c-style-for-loop]_ executes its body of an iteration statement while a specified 
  Boolean expression evaluates to true. 
- The ``foreach`` statement enumerates the elements of a collection and executes 
  its body for each element of the collection. 
- The ``do`` statement conditionally executes its body one or more times. 
- The ``while`` statement conditionally executes its body zero or more times.

As a solution to the preceding code repetition problem, a ``for`` loop can be used as below. 
Comparing the highlighted for statement with the, you can see the need for iteration. 
The syntax of the ``for`` loop statement will be explained in a later section. 

.. code-block:: csharp
  :linenos:
  :emphasize-lines: 13-16

  using System;
  namespace IntroCSCS
  {
    internal class Chapter05
    {
        private static void Main(string[] args)
        {
            CountToThen();
        }

        static void CountToThen()
        {
            for (int i = 1; i <= 10; i = i + 1)
            {
                Console.Write(i + " ");
            }
            // output: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
            Console.WriteLine();
        }
    }
  }



Iterator/Step
-----------------

The iterator, also known as **step**, section can contain zero or more expressions, separated by commas. 
Commonly used iterators include:

- prefix or postfix increment expression, such as ++i or i++
- prefix or postfix decrement expression, such as --i or i-- 
- assignment

The arithmetic unary operators (decrement operator ``--`` and 
increment operator ``++``) are probably the most common ones used in for and while loops, especially 
the postfix increment operator. The result of a postfix increment operation is that it 
increments the value of the local loop variable (``i``) and still evaluates to the original value 
as before the operation and will update the value in next iteration. Namely, ``i++`` will retain 
the old value in the body of the for statement until next next iteration. 

For example, test this in ``csharprepl``::

   > int num = 3;
   > num 
   3
   > num++       // postfix expression, the value remains
   3
   > num         // i is evaluated again. Now it shows 4. 
   4
   > 

Observe the code below to compare the behavior of postfix and prefix operations and you will see 
the difference between the postfix expression and prefix expression:

.. code-block:: csharp
   :linenos:
   :emphasize-lines: 5, 12
   
   static void PostfixIncrement()
   {
      int i = 0;
      Console.WriteLine("int i == {0}", i);  // i == 0
      Console.WriteLine("i++ == {0}", i++);  // i++ == 0
      Console.WriteLine("i == {0}", i);      // i == 1
   } 
   
   {
      int j = 0;
      Console.WriteLine("int j == {0}", j);  // j == 0
      Console.WriteLine("++j == {0}", ++j);  // ++j == 1
      Console.WriteLine("j == {0}", j);      // j == 1
   }

When setting a "**step**, you may also use assignment statement (see :ref:`assignment-operators`) to step, which give you 
more flexibility in stepping. For example, in ``csharprepl``::

  > int n = int.Parse(Console.ReadLine()); 
    for (var i = 0; i <= n; i += 10) 
    { 
        Console.WriteLine(i); 
    }
  30
  0
  10
  20
  30


``return``, ``break``, and ``continue``
------------------------------------------

``break``, ``continue``, ``return``, and ``goto`` are the jump statements (see: :ref:`statements`) in 
C# that transfer the control of code execution flow. 

You can stop a loop in the middle with an ``if`` statement 
that leads to a choice with a ``return`` statement, which forces you to completely 
leave the current method block. Note that return breaks the current code execution and continue from 
where the method is called.

With the ``break`` statement, you exit/break out of the current loop. The ``break`` statement 
terminates the closest enclosing iteration statement (for, foreach, while, or do loop) 
or switch statement. 

With the ``continue`` statement, you terminate the current loop and step to the next 
iteration. The ``continue`` statement stops the current execution flow and starts a new iteration of 
the closest enclosing iteration statement (for, foreach, while, or do loop). 


.. _loop-planning-rubric:
Loop Planning Rubric
------------------------
   
Looking ahead to more complicated and interesting problems,
here is a list of questions to ask yourself when
designing a method with a loop:

-  Data & loop variables: What data is involved? Make sure you give good variable names.
-  Initialization: What needs to be initialized and how? This certainly includes any
   variable tested in the condition.
-  Condition: What is the condition that will allow the loop to *continue*? It
   may be easier to think of the condition that will *stop* the loop.
   That is fine - but remember to *negate* it (with ``!``) to turn it
   into a proper *continuation* condition.
-  Distinguish: What is the code that should only be executed once? 
   What action do I want to repeat? 
-  Repetition: How do I write the repeating action so I can modify it for the next time
   through the loop to work with new data?
-  Update: What code is needed to do modifications to make the same action code work
   the next time through the loop?
-  Locale variables: Have I thought of variables needed in the middle and declared them;
   do other things need initialization?
-  Condition: Will the continuation condition eventually fail?  
   *Be sure to think about this!*
-  Structure: Separate the actions to be done once before the repetition (code before the
   loop) from repetitive actions (in the loop) and from actions not repeated, but
   done after the loop (code after the loop). Missing this distinction
   is a *common error*!

This is quite a sequence of steps!  Particularly looking forward to other forms of loops,
we can note a more basic split into two parts:

* Writing the code to make sure each desired iteration is reached 
  (loop dynamics: initialized data for the test condition, the test condition itself, 
  preparing for the next iteration)
* Doing the work for a specific item/iteration (most of the body of the loop)

You generally only need to concentrate on one of those at a time.  
If you set up how to reach all of the repetitions, giving names for the variables
to be acted on, then you can separately just concentrate on dealing with the the action/code
to deal with the *current* situation.


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#iteration] See: C# Language Reference: `Iteration statements - for, foreach, do, and while <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/statements/iteration-statements>`.
.. [#c-style-for-loop] The C# for loop is C-style for loop since C# is one of the C-family languages. The ``for (initialization; condition; update)`` for loop is also the only one type of for loop in C language.
