Operators
===========

Operators in programming languages are symbols that tells the 
compiler or interpreter to perform specific operations. The 
operand combined with the operator makes an operation. In 
an operation, an *operand* is the data that is being operated on. 
The position of the operator, with respect to its 
operands, may be prefix, infix or postfix.


Common simple operators include 

- *arithmetic* (e.g. addition with +), 
- *comparison* (e.g. "greater than" with >), and 
- *logical* (e.g. AND, also written && in some languages) operators. 
  
Additional types of operators include assignment (usually = or :=), 
field access in a record or object (usually .), and bitwise and 
shift operators.  

Operators can be categorized based on the number of operands 
required. The three categories of operators based on the 
number of operands they require are: 

- Unary operators: which require one operand (e.g., ++, !) 
- Binary operators: which require two operands (e.g., +) 
- Ternary operators: which require three operands (e.g., condition ? consequent : alternative)


.. index:: 
  arithmetic operators
  
  
.. _arithmetic-operators:
  

Arithmetic Operators
---------------------

.. list-table:: Arithmetic Operators
    :widths: 20 20 40 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Operator	
      - Name	
      - Description	
      - Example	
    * - ``+``
      - Addition	
      - Adds together two values	
      - x + y	
    * -	``-``
      - Subtraction	
      - Subtracts one value from another	
      - x - y	
    * - ``*``
      -	Multiplication
      - Multiplies two values	
      - x * y	
    * - ``/``	
      - Division	
      - Divides one value by another	
      - x / y	
    * - ``%``	
      - Modulus	
      - Returns the division remainder	
      - x % y	
    * - ``++``	
      - Increment	
      - Increases the value of a variable by 1	
      - x++	
    * - ``--``	
      - Decrement	
      - Decreases the value of a variable by 1	
      - x--

Examples of arithmetic operators:

.. code-block:: 

  > x = 1;

  > x++       // post-increment operator; x++ increments the value of variable x after it's evaluated in an expression
  1
  > x
  2

  > x = 2;
  > ++x       // pre-increment operator; ++x increments the value of variable x before it's evaluated in an expression
  3


Comparison Operators
---------------------

Comparison operators, also known as relational operators, compare 
their operands (numbers or strings) and return a value of either 
``True`` (1) or ``False`` (0). These two values are known as Boolean values 
and are used in conditional statements for decision making.  

.. list-table:: Comparison Operators
    :widths: 20 20 60
    :header-rows: 1
    
    * - Operator	
      - Name	
      - Example	
    * - ``==``	
      - Equal to	
      - x == y	
    * - ``!=``	
      - Not equal to	
      - x != y	
    * - ``>``	
      - Greater than	
      - x > y	
    * - ``<``	
      - Less than	
      - x < y	
    * - ``>=``	
      - Greater than or equal to	
      - x >= y	
    * - ``<=``	
      - Less than or equal to	
      - x <= y	

Examples of comparison operations:

.. code-block:: 

  > int x = 1, y = 2;

  > x == y
  false
  
  > x < y
  true
  
  > x <= y
  true
  > 


.. _logical-operators:

Logical Operators
---------------------------

Logical Boolean operators [#]_ are used to determine the logic between variables or values. 
Just like comparison operators, logical operators return True or False as a result 
of the evaluation. 

.. list-table:: Logical Operators
    :widths: 20 20 40 20
    :header-rows: 1
    
    * - Operator	
      - Name	
      - Description	
      - Example	
    * - ``!``	(unary)
      - Logical negation operator	
      - Returns logical negation of its operand	
      - !true  	// False
    * -	``&&``
      - Logical and	
      - Returns True if both statements are true	
      - x < 5 &&  x < 10
    * - ``||``
      -	Logical or
      - Returns True if one of the statements is true	
      - x < 5 || x < 4	
  
Examples of logical operators are:

.. code-block:: 

  > int x = 2;                  
  
  > x < 5 && x < 10
  true

  > x < 5 || x < 10
  true

  > !(x < 5 && x < 10) 
  false


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] In C# Reference, ``&&`` is called Conditional logical AND operator, which is almost the same as & except it performs "short-circuit evaluation": if the result can be inferred from the first operand, then the second operand is not evaluated, while logical AND operator ``&`` will always evaluate both its operands. The same applies to Logical OR operator ``|``. Also, C# has logical exclusive OR operator ``^``, which computes the same result as the inequality operator ``!=`` for bool operands. 




.. Operator Precedence
.. Truth Tables