.. index:: string, string length, string indexing

.. _string:

Strings
================

A string in C# is a collection of literal characters used to store text. 
In C# string must be enclosed in double quotes to delimit the string. 

Since a string is a series of characters (of the ``char`` type), we can 
refer to the individual characters by using index numbers, which can be useful 
when we need to manipulate strings and character level. In the example below, 
the character f has an index number of 0.

+-----------+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
| Index     | 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 |
+-----------+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
| Character | f | o | r | m | o | s | a |
+-----------+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

When represented in code, indexing works like below:

.. code-block:: none
    
    > string txt = "ilha formosa";  
    > txt[3]
    'a'
    > 

Note that, in the example above, the output is a character since strings consist of 
characters and the ``char`` type are created by delimiting the characters by single 
quotation marks. 


Creating a String
------------------

To create a variable of type string and assign it with a value:

.. code-block:: 

    > string dayOfWeek = "Monday";

    > dayOfWeek      // the REPL shell prints the variable value 
    "Monday"
    > 

In an editor such as VS Code, this would look like the following, where ``Console.WriteLine`` 
prints out the string rather than REPL. 

.. code-block:: C#
    :linenos:

    string dayOfWeek = "Monday";

    Console.WriteLine(dayOfWeek);   // Console.WriteLine for output

Since this is a console app, we use the TERMINAL in VS Code to do ``dotnet run``
to see the project outcome. Make sure you are in the right project directory, though.    


.. index:: string; concatenation with +
   concatenation
   single: +; string concatenation
   operator; + string concatenation

.. _String-Concatenation:
   
String Concatenation
---------------------
   
String concatenation is to join stings together. In C#, the ``+`` operator 
is used to perform concatenation. Note C# uses the ``+`` operator for both 
arithmetic addition and concatenation. To concatenate two strings together:

.. code-block:: none

    > string firstName = "Tsangyao";    // assign value to variable
    > string lastName = " Chen";    

    > firstName + lastName              // concatenation
    "Tsangyao Chen"
    > 

C# can also concatenate values of different data types. The example below 
shows you how to concatenate data of string type and int type: 

.. code-block:: none

    > int aLargeAmountOf = 400;                                

    > "I spent " + aLargeAmountOf + " dollars on coffee this week."
    "I spent 400 dollars on coffee this week."
    > 


Escape Special Characters
---------------------------

.. index::
   escape code \
   single: \ ; character escape code
   character escape code \
   
Since C# requires double quotation marks as delimiters for creating strings, when we need 
to show quotation marks as part of a string, the situation becomes tricky. Consider the 
following string toBe1. We see that there is a syntax error at (1,18) (line# 1, character# 18) 
when trying to put a quotation inside the string:  

.. code-block:: none

    > string toBe1 = ""To be, or not to be" is a speech given by Prince Hamlet.";  
    ┌────CompilationErrorException─────┐
    │ (1,18): error CS1002: ; expected │
    └──────────────────────────────────┘

To make the quotation work, we need to use the special character backslash ``\`` as *escape character*, 
meaning that the character following it should be treated specially: They turns 
special characters into string characters. 

    > string toBe2 = "\"To be, or not to be\" is a speech given by Prince Hamlet.";

    > Console.WriteLine(toBe2);
    "To be, or not to be" is a speech given by Prince Hamlet.
    
In our example above, the ``"`` in ``\"To be`` and ``to be\"`` are escaped and 
therefore special character ``"`` can be treated as string and shown as intended.

Another example would look like the following. 

.. code-block:: none

    > Console.WriteLine("Goog morning!");
    Goog morning!
    > Console.WriteLine("He said, \"Goog morning!\".");
    He said, "Goog morning!".

Common special cases to be escaped include:

+------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Escape character | Result                                |
+==================+=======================================+
| ``\"``           | ``"`` (quote)                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``\'``           | ``'`` ( single quote in char literal) |
+------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``\\``           | ``\`` (backslash)                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``\n``           | new line                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``\t``           | new tab                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------+

The newline character (``\n``) inserts a new line and move the cursor 
to the beginning of the new line. This is useful because C# string literals 
are characters delimited by double quotation marks ``"`` in one line. [#]_ To 
print to multiple lines, we use ``\n`` like:  

.. code-block:: none

    > Console.WriteLine("Good morning. Good afternoon. Good evening.");
    Good morning. Good afternoon. Good evening.

    > Console.WriteLine("Good morning. \nGood afternoon. \nGood evening.");
    Good morning. 
    Good afternoon. 
    Good evening.

    > 
    
 
String Properties and Methods
-----------------------------

Although we use string literals, strings are objects. In object-oriented-programming, 
objects have *instance properties* and *instance methods*. Some examples of C# string 
properties and methods are: 

The length of a string can be found using the ``Length`` property::

    string txt = "ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ";
    Console.WriteLine("The length of the txt string is: " + txt.Length);


There are many string methods available [#]_. As examples, ToUpper() and ToLower() 
return a copy of the string converted to uppercase or lowercase:

.. code-block:: csharp

    string txt = "Hello World";
    Console.WriteLine(txt.ToUpper());   // Outputs "HELLO WORLD"
    Console.WriteLine(txt.ToLower());   // Outputs "hello world"



.. rubric:: Footnotes 

.. [#] You can use `verbatim text <"https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/tokens/verbatim">`_ to achieve multiple line text.
.. [#] See `String methods <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.string?view=net-8.0#methods>`_ for a complete list. 
   
