Data Types
=========================

A data type specifies the size and type of variable values. In other words, data types 
are used when assigning values to variables. In programming, "data" refers 
to a value that is stored in the computer's memory. A number 
``10``, for example, is stored in the memory as ``1010``. As the number get  
extremely larger or smaller or complex, or when different types of data such as text are introduced, 
the designers of the the programming language need to decide how much memory to save 
for different types of values, hence different data types other than just the binary 
system to achieve more efficient use of memory. 

There are two kinds of data types in C#: **reference types** and **value types**. 
Variables of value types contain the data directory while variables of reference types 
stores reference to the data known as objects. Value types are predefined types 
and are available in C# as keywords. These keywords are aliases of types defined in the 
.NET Class Library. For example, the C# keyword int is an alias of a value type defined 
in the .NET Class Library as System.Int32. [#]_

Common Data Types in C#
-----------------------------

C# is a "strongly typed" language, meaning that every variable and constant has a type. 
Also, types are required for expressions that evaluate to a value, method declarations 
with names, input parameters, and return values. Some examples of the most common value 
types are in variable assignment are as follows. 

.. code-block:: console

    int myNum = 5;                  // Integer (whole number)
    long myNum = 15000000000L;      // Integer 
    double myDoubleNum = 5.99D;     // Floating point number
    char myLetter = 'D';            // Character
    bool myBool = true;             // Boolean
    string myText = "Hello";        // String

Note that C# requires number **suffixes**, especially for floating-point types, when assigning 
numeric literals. The purpose of using suffixes is to help the compiler unambiguously 
identify the data type of the value/literal. The basic rules for number suffixes are:

- The number literal without suffix or with the d or D suffix is of type double
- f or F suffix is of type float
- m or M suffix is of type decimal
- l or L for long 
- U or u for unsigned integer
- UL or ul for unsigned long
- If an integral literal has no suffix, its type is the first of the following types in 
  which its value can be represented: int, uint, long, ulong.
  

To make our code works correctly and more memory-efficient, we need to choose the appropriate 
data types according to the design requirements of the variable. Different types are therefore 
designed to meet the needs of the scenario. For example, for financial unit, decimal is a better 
choice because it is designed for the purpose of holding a larger range of digits with 
higher precision. Types and their memory size, for example, can be seen in the table below. 


============ =====================  =============== ==================================================================
Type	      Size	                 Precision        Description
============ =====================  =============== ==================================================================
``byte``     1 byte/8 bits                            Integral range 0 to 255 (no negative values)
``short``    16 bits                                  Integral range -32,768 to 32,767
``int``	     4 bytes/32 bits                          Integral range -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647
``long``     8 bytes/64 bits                          Integral range from -9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807
``float``    4 bytes/32 bits         ~6-9 digits      Fractional numbers. 
``double``   8 bytes/64 bits         ~15-17 digits    Fractional numbers ±1.5 x 10−45 to ±3.4 x 1038. 
``decimal``  16 bytes/128 bits       28-29 digits     Fractional numbers ±1.0 x 10-28 to ±7.9228 x 1028
``bool``     1 bit	                                  True or false values
``char``     2 bytes	                              A single character/letter corresponding to Unicode character set, surrounded by single quotes
``string``   2 bytes per character                    A sequence of characters, surrounded by double quotes
============ =====================  =============== ==================================================================


The integral value data types can be either signed or unsigned. A signed type uses its bytes to represent 
an equal number of positive and negative numbers; whereas an unsigned type (such as ``ushort``, ``uint``, 
and ``ulong``) uses its bytes to represent only positive numbers. The difference between 
singed and unsigned numbers can be seen from the example below::

.. code-block:: console

    Console.WriteLine("Signed integral types:");

    Console.WriteLine($"short  : {short.MinValue} to {short.MaxValue}");
    Console.WriteLine($"int    : {int.MinValue} to {int.MaxValue}");
    Console.WriteLine($"long   : {long.MinValue} to {long.MaxValue}");

    Console.WriteLine("");
    Console.WriteLine("Unsigned integral types:");

    Console.WriteLine($"byte   : {byte.MinValue} to {byte.MaxValue}");
    Console.WriteLine($"ushort : {ushort.MinValue} to {ushort.MaxValue}");
    Console.WriteLine($"uint   : {uint.MinValue} to {uint.MaxValue}");
    Console.WriteLine($"ulong  : {ulong.MinValue} to {ulong.MaxValue}");

We would see the output as below:

.. code-block:: console
    
    Signed integral types:
    sbyte  : -128 to 127
    short  : -32768 to 32767
    int    : -2147483648 to 2147483647
    long   : -9223372036854775808 to 9223372036854775807

    Unsigned integral types:
    byte   : 0 to 255
    ushort : 0 to 65535
    uint   : 0 to 4294967295
    ulong  : 0 to 18446744073709551615


C# Built-in Types System
--------------------------

C# has a type system with types defined more than shown in the table above. 

Reference types:
    There are 4 reference types: class type, interface type, array type, and delegate type. 
    Under class type, types such as string and array are defined. 

For value types, C# defines a simple types as follows.

simple_type
    : numeric_type
    | 'bool'
    ;

numeric_type
    : integral_type
    | floating_point_type
    | 'decimal'
    ;

integral_type
    : 'sbyte'
    | 'byte'
    | 'short'
    | 'ushort'
    | 'int'
    | 'uint'
    | 'long'
    | 'ulong'
    | 'char'
    ;

floating_point_type
    : 'float'
    | 'double'
    ;




Type Conversion 
----------------

C# has specific types but from time to time we may need our data to switch between 
the types. For example, when your program takes a user input for age, the input is 
of string type while it's intended for numeric type. You then need to cast the type 
to the data type intended. This switch may be implicit or explicit. 
Implicit conversion means the 
conversion happens automatically, such as a type int can implicitly be treated 
as a type long. 

For integral numeric types, if the destination type can store 
all values of the source type, the conversion is implicit. Otherwise, you need to 
use a cast expression to perform an explicit conversion. Other conversions between any floating-point type to any other floating-point type requires 
For floating-point numeric types, conversion from float to double is implicit. 
explicit cast.

Since conversion involves the defined size, conversion (casting) can be understand as:

Implicit Casting (automatically) 
  - converting a smaller type to a larger type size
    char -> int -> long -> float -> double

Explicit Casting (manually) 
  - converting a larger type to a smaller size type
    double -> float -> long -> int -> char

For instance,  the conversion from type int to type long is implicit, so expressions of type int 
can implicitly be treated as type long. On the other hand, The opposite conversion, from type 
long to type int, is explicit and so an explicit cast is required. Observe the example below and 
you see that an int type variable converts to a long type variable implicitly while a long type 
variable converting back to int has to be done explicitly. 

When performing type casting, we put the desired result type name in parentheses as a *cast*. In the 
example below, we are casting the value of variable b into an int type by placing ``(int)`` in 
front of it. Here we use the GetType() method from the System namespace to get the type of an instance. 

.. code-block:: c#

    > int a = 123;      // variable a is assigned a value of 123
    > long b = a;       // implicit conversion from int to long by reassignment
    > int c = (int) b;  // explicit conversion from long to int    
    > a.GetType()       // use the GetType() function to get the type of the variable
     int
    > b.GetType()
     long
    > c.GetType()
     int

When the types are not cast properly, C# will give error messages. For example:

.. code-block:: none

    > double d = 2.0;
    > int i = d;
    ┌─────────────────────────────────────────CompilationErrorException─────────────────────────────────────────┐
    │ (1,9): error CS0266: Cannot implicitly convert type 'double' to 'int'. An explicit conversion exists (are │
    │ you missing a cast?)                                                                                      │
    └───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
  
Note that if you choose to agree with the message and perform a type casting, you lose the 
precision of ``double`` over an ``int``.

.. code-block:: none

    > double d = 2.5;       // create a double type variable d
    > d                     
    2.5
    > int i;                // declare an int without value assignment
    > i                     // get the (default) value of an int
    0
    > i = (int)d;           // explicitly telling the compiler you intend the conversion
    > i                     // get the value of i; the value .5 is lost
    2
    > 

.. index:: Round function

Rounding is similar to casting a floating type to possible as it gives us an ``int`` type.
The function ``Math.Round`` will round to a mathematical integer, but leaves
the type unchanged. So we need to perform a type casting after rounding:

.. code-block:: none

    > d
    2.7
    > d.GetType()
    double
    > d = Math.Round(d);        // rounding and re-assignment
    > d
    3
    > d.GetType()               // the type remains 
    double
    > i = (int)Math.Round(d);   // casting to int
    > i
    3
    > i.GetType()               // type correct
    int

Casting from int to double is usually not necessary but cause of implicit conversion. 
A use case for this would be when doing divisions, where ``double`` would work better than 
``int``. As an example, using csharprepl, we see that:

.. code-block:: none

    > int denominator = 3;
    > int numerator = 14;
    > numerator / denominator               // an integer division 
    4
    > (double) numerator / denominator      // intended operation; casting required
    4.666666666666667
    > 
    

6 Built-in (Simple) C# Types
------------------------------

char
~~~~~~

The type for an individual character is ``char``.  A ``char`` literal value is
a *single* character enclosed in *single* quotes, like ``'a'`` or ``'$'``.  

Note that when a character is surrounded by double quotation marks, it becomes 
a string literal, such as ``"A"``.

Also, the char type keyword is an alias for the .NET System.Char structure type that 
represents a Unicode UTF-16 character. Internally, a ``char`` is an integer, stored in 16 bits,
with the correspondence between numeric codes and characters given by the 
*Unicode* standard. For example:

.. code-block:: console
  
    var chars = new[] {     // an implicitly typed array
        'j',
        '\u006A',
        '\x006A',
        (char)106,
    };

    Console.WriteLine(string.Join(" ", chars));  // output: j j j j

As seen in the type system, the type char is one of the integral types used to represent 
characters. We can therefore cast char like below as an example::

    > (int)'A';
    65
    > (int)'+';
    43

An we can even perform arithmetical operations on chars like::  

    > Console.WriteLine('A' + '+');
    108


Boolean/bool 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Boolean data type can only have one of two values and is used in conditional (if)
statements, which allow us to build logic in our programs:: 

- YES / NO
- ON / OFF
- TRUE / FALSE

The type *bool* is an alias for *System.Boolean* with literals of ``true`` and ``false``. 
A Boolean expression, on the hand, would return a boolean value of ``True`` or ``False`` 
as a result of comparing values/variables. For example::

    int x = 10;
    int y = 9;
    Console.WriteLine(x > y); // returns True, because 10 is higher than 9



.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] For a list of all specified value types, see, for example: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/language-specification/types#83-value-types 