.. index:: arithmetic

.. _arithmetic:
   
Arithmetic
==================

Arithmetic operations are usually included in learning a programming 
language because the constructs are similar to computation and therefore 
easier for the learners to associate. The C# Math class has many 
methods that allows you to perform arithmetic tasks on numbers.


The C# REPL (``csharprepl``)
--------------------------------
We want to use start by using ``csharprepl`` so that we can run some 
quick-and-dirty C# code for practice and testing purposes. 
Open a terminal and enter the command 
``csharprepl``, You should see:

.. code-block:: none

    tychen@mac:~/workspace/tests$ csharprepl
    Welcome to the C# REPL (Read Eval Print Loop)!
    Type C# expressions and statements at the prompt and press Enter to evaluate them.
    Type help to learn more, exit to quit, and clear to clear your terminal.

    > 

The ``>`` prompt tells you that the C# interpreter has started
and is awaiting input. This allows you to test C# code interactively 
without having to create a project, modify it, save it, and run 
``dotnet run`` to test it. 

When you are done with ``csharprepl``, you can enter ``exit`` to quit the shell.

The *repl* part in csharprepl is an acronym for the *Read-Evaluate-Print Loop* 
(REPL). A REPL is a language shell provides simple interactive computer programming 
environment that runs code piecewise. It evaluates expressions immediately and prints 
the result on a line without a prompt. The REPL can evaluate arbitrary C# 
expressions. It is very handy for testing as you get used to C# syntax. 



Addition, Subtraction, and Multiplication
-------------------------------------------

.. index::
   single: operator; + with numbers
   single: +; with numbers

Inside csharprepl, enter what comes after the prompt (REPL prints the 
results directly without having to use the ``Console.WriteLine()`` method):

.. code-block:: none
 
    > 2 + 3
    5
    > Console.WriteLine(1+1)
    2

.. index::
   operator; -
   single: -; subtraction

Now let us do some arithmetic operations: 

.. code-block:: none
 
    > 10 - 3
    7


.. index::
   operator; *
   single: * multiplication

In the Math class, you could enter something like 4(10) for multiplication, but 
in C#, you need to use the multiplication operator ``*``:

.. code-block:: none
 
    > 4(10);
      ┌─────────CompilationErrorException─────────┐   
      │ (1,1): error CS0149: Method name expected │   
      └───────────────────────────────────────────┘   
    > 4 * 10
    40

.. Unfortunately the error messages are not always easy to follow:  
.. it is hard to guess the
.. intention of the user making a mistake.


.. index::
   single:  ( ); grouping
   grouping ( )
   single: -; negation  


C# uses the normal *precedence* of arithmetic operations: Multiplications, 
divisions, and negations are done before addition and subtraction, unless
there are parentheses forcing the order: 

.. code-block:: none

    > 2 + 3 * 4 
    14
    > -(2+3)*4 
    -20 


.. index:: 
   single: remainder %
   single: % remainder
   single: operator; /, %
   division
   single: / ; division
   single: . ; double literal
   double
   int
   type; int
   type; double

.. _Division-and-Remainders:
   
Division 
--------------------------------

   
Division can be a little tricky in C#. For example:

.. code-block:: none

    > 5.0/2.0;
    2.5
    > 14.0/4.0;
    3.5

But C# will implicitly turn the following expression to an ``int`` type:

.. code-block:: none

    > 14/4
    3


Adding a decimal point would inform C# that you are using ``double`` instead of ``int``:

.. code-block:: none

    > 14.0/4.0
    3.5
    > 14.0 / 4      // one of the operands is double type
    3.5
    > 6.0/3.0       // when the remainder is 0, the quotient is an int.
    2
    > 

Note that C# stores values with only a limited precision, so the results of 
mathematical operations are only approximate in general. The following 
is an example that shows the ``double`` type has a precision of ~15-17 digits:

.. code-block:: none

    > 1.0/3
    0.333333333333333


Remainders
--------------

Remainder is used to check if a number is divisible by another number. 
The remainder operator ``%`` computes the remainder after dividing its 
left-hand operand by its right-hand operand. 

Try in the ``csharprepl``:

.. code-block:: none

    > 14 % 7
    0
    > 14 % 4
    2
    > int x = 0;
    > x = 7 % 5;  // x now contains 2
    2
    > x = 9 % 5;  // x now contains 4
    4
    > x = 5 % 5;  // x now contains 0
    0
    > x = 4 % 5;  // x now contains 4
    4
    > x = -4 % 5; // x now contains -4
    -4
    > x = 4 % -5; // x now contains 4
    4

Finding remainders can be useful in the future. For example, to count the 
number of hours in 

!  Remember the strange ``%`` operator.

.. note::
   The precedence of ``%`` is the same as ``/`` and ``*``, and hence
   higher than addition and subtraction, ``+`` and ``-``. 

When you are *done with csharp*, you can enter the special expression

.. code-block:: none

    quit

There are some more details about numeric types in :ref:`value-types`.

.. index:: expression

We have been testing arithmetic expressions, with the word 
*expression* used pretty much like with normal math.  More generally in C#
an *expression* is any syntax that evaluates to a single value of some type.  
We will introduce many more types and operations that can be used in expressions. 

Exercise
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unix time is a date and time representation widely used in computing. 
It measures time by the number of non-leap seconds that have elapsed 
since 00:00:00 UTC on 1st January 1970, the Unix epoch. 

In csharprepl, we can find the current time and it's timestamp:

.. code-block:: none

    > DateTime.Now
    8/23/2024 1:43:33 AM
    > var timeStamp =  new DateTimeOffset(DateTime.UtcNow).ToUnixTimeSeconds();

    > timeStamp
    1724395921
    > 

The timestamp above is the number of seconds since the Unix epoch. Use the 
remainder operator to figure out how many minutes, hours, and days has it 
been since 00:00:00 UTC on 1st January 1970.    

