Operators
===========

Operators in programming languages are symbols that tells the 
compiler or interpreter to perform specific operations. Common 
simple operators include *arithmetic* (e.g. addition with +), 
*comparison* (e.g. "greater than" with >), and *logical* 
(e.g. AND, also written && in some languages) operators. Additional  
types of operators include assignment (usually = or :=), 
field access in a record or object (usually .), and bitwise and 
shift operators. 

In an operation, an *operand* is the data that is being operated on. 
The operand combined with the operator makes an operation. 
Operators can be categorized based on the number of operands 
required. The three categories of operators based on the 
number of operands they require are: 

- Unary operators: which require one operand (e.g., ++, !) 
- Binary operators: which require two operands (e.g., +) 
- Ternary operators: which require three operands (e.g., condition ? consequent : alternative)

Arithmetic Operators
---------------------

.. list-table:: Title
    :widths: 15 20 40 25
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Operator	
      - Name	
      - Description	
      - Example	
    * - +	
      - Addition	
      - Adds together two values	
      - x + y	
    * -	-
      - Subtraction	
      - Subtracts one value from another	
      - x - y	
    * - *
      -	Multiplication
      - Multiplies two values	
      - x * y	
    * - /	
      - Division	
      - Divides one value by another	
      - x / y	
    * - %	
      - Modulus	
      - Returns the division remainder	
      - x % y	
    * - ++	
      - Increment	
      - Increases the value of a variable by 1	
      - x++	
    * - --	
      - Decrement	
      - Decreases the value of a variable by 1	
      - x--



temps



Operators in computer programming languages are symbols 
defined in programming languages that instruct 
the compiler or interpreter to perform specific mathematical, 
relational or logical operations.

The position of the operator with respect to its 
operands may be prefix, infix or postfix. 

Most programming languages support binary operators 
and a few unary operators, with a few supporting 
more operands, such as the ?: operator in C, which is ternary. 