

Lab 02: Variables and Input
====================================================

We have discussed the development environment and tools, 
the concepts of variables and data types (with some elaborations on arithmetic and 
strings), along with the basic syntax and program structure. 

You might like to do a quick review of some of 
the parts, testing in the `csharprepl` program, so you get immediate feedback
for the statements and expressions.

Variable Reassignment
------------------------

For now consider a small, artificial example program,::
   
   using System;

   class UpdateVars
   {
      static void Main()
      {  // simple sequential code updating two variables
         int x = 3;
         int y = x + 2;
         y = 2 * y;
         x = y - x;
         Console.WriteLine (x + " " + y);
      }
   }

emphasizing the ability to *reassign* variable values. 
       
Can you *predict* the result? Run the program and check.
Particularly if you did not guess right, it is important to
understand what happens, one step at a time. That means keeping
track of what changes to variables are made by each statement.

In the table below, statements are referred to by the numbers labeling
the lines in the code above. We can track the state of each
variable after each line is executed. A dash is shown where a
variable is not yet defined. For instance after line 7 is executed, a
value is given to x, but y is still undefined. Then y gets a value
in line 8. 
The comment space can be used any time
it is helpful.  In particular it should be used  when something
is printed, since this
important action does *not* affect the variable list.

====  ==  ==  =======================================
Line  x   y   Comment
====  ==  ==  =======================================
5     \-  \-  Start at beginning of Main
7     3   \-  initialize x
8     3   5   5=3+2, using the value of x from the previous line
9     3   10  10=2*5 on the right; use the value of y from the
              previous line
10    7   10  7=10-3 on the right; use the value of x and y from the
              previous line
11    7   10  print: 7 10
====  ==  ==  =======================================

The critical point here is to always use the most recently assigned value
of each variable.  Unlike in math, symbol values change!

The order of execution will always be the order of the lines in our
table. In this simple *sequential* code, that *also* follows the
textual order of the program. 

Following each line of execution of a
program in the proper order of execution, carefully, 
keeping track of the current values of
variables, will be called *playing computer*. A table like the one
above is an organized way to keep track.

The line numbering is not very exciting in a simple sequential program,
but it will become very important when we get to other execution sequences.
We start with the simple sequential numbering now for consistency, as
we get used to the idea of such a table following execution sequence.




User Input
------------

We want to develop a program that can do the following:

- Prompt the user for input of two integers, which we will call
  *numerator* and *denominator*. For clarity, we are only looking at
  integers, because this assignment is about rational numbers. A
  rational number can always be expressed as a quotient of two integers.

- Calculate the floating point division result (e.g. 10/4 = 2.5).

- Calculate the quotient and the remainder (e.g. 10/4 = 2 with a
  remainder of 2 = 2 2/4).

Your final program should work as in this sample run, and use the same 
labeled format:

.. code-block:: none

   Please enter the numerator? 14
   Please enter the denominator? 4
   Integer division result = 3 with a remainder 2
   Floating point division result = 3.5
   The result as a mixed fraction is 3 2/4.

For this lab the example format ``3 2/4`` is sufficient.
It would look better as ``3 1/2``, but a general 
efficient way to reduce fractions to
lowest terms is not covered until the section on the algorithm `gcd`.  

To do the part requiring a decimal quotient you are going to 
need to have a ``double`` value, though your original data 
was of type ``int``.

You could use the approach in `cast`, with an explicit cast. 
Another approach mentioned in that section was to do the cast implicitly
in a ``double`` declaration with initialization from an ``int``. If we
already had ``int`` variables, ``numerator`` and 
``denominator``, that were previously assigned their values, 
we could use::

    double numeratorDouble = numerator; // implicit cast
    double quotientDouble = numeratorDouble/denominator;
    ...

Remember: at least one operand in a quotient must be ``double`` 
to get a ``double`` result.
    
To help you get started with your program code, 
we provided this simple *stub*::

  using System;

  class DoTheMath {   // Lab stub
    static void Main() {
        /* Prompt the user for the numerator using
          Console.Write().

          Convert this text into int numerator using
          int.Parse().

          Do the same for the denominator.

          Calculate quotient and remainder (as integers)
          Use Console.WriteLine() to display the labels
          as illustrated in the sample output in the lab.

          Do the same but using floating point division
          and not doing the remainder calculation.

          Create the sentence with the mixed fraction.
          Be careful of the places there are *not* spaces.
        */
    }
  } 

.. in the example file
.. :repsrc:`do_the_math_stub/do_the_math.cs`. 

You are encouraged to copy this design/algorithm into your 
project file to help with your coding.


The body of ``Main`` presently contains only *comments*, skipped by the compiler.  
We illustrate two forms (being inconsistent for your information only):

* ``//`` to the end of the *same* line
* ``/*`` to ``*/`` through any number of lines.

Save the stub in a project of
your own and replace the comments with your code to complete it:


     


    