Introduction
==============

The term "data structure" could mean any structure (such as a list, array, tree, 
dictionary, etc) that stores data. You can say that a class as simple as an employee 
object storing employee-specific data is a structure. Academically, it is common 
to more focus on data structure as a data organization and storage format (hash, array, etc) 
that is usually chosen for efficient access to data. A data structure, therefore, 
is a collection of data values, the relationship among them, and the functions 
or operations that can be applied to them. [#data-structure-wiki]_  

However when we talk about data structures, we are often referring to commonly  
structured sets of data, and they are sometimes called "collections". Collections 
are sets of data. They can include lists, dictionaries, trees, etc. From the 
implementation perspective, a collection is an ``abstract data type`` that is 
a grouping of items of often the same data type such as string or integer. 

In NET, the namespace (and hence types) that store the sets of data is System.Collections. 
Therefore in NET we tend to use the term collections for any of the data structures 
used to store sets of data, including arrays. [#data_structure-vs-collection]_ 

Microsoft, from the implementation perspective, equates collections as data structure by 
saying that: [#microsoft-collections-and-data_structure]_

  Similar data can often be handled more efficiently when stored and 
  manipulated as a collection. You can use the System.Array class or the classes 
  in the System.Collections, System.Collections.Generic, System.Collections.Concurrent, 
  and System.Collections.Immutable namespaces to add, remove, and modify either 
  individual elements or a range of elements in a collection.


C# Collections
----------------

According to the C# language reference, [#csharp-collections]_

  The .NET runtime provides many collection types that store and manage groups of 
  related objects. Some of the collection types, such as System.Array, System.Span<T>, 
  and System.Memory<T> are recognized in the C# language. In addition, interfaces 
  like System.Collections.Generic.IEnumerable<T> are recognized in the language for 
  enumerating the elements of a collection.

Collection types represent different ways to collect data, such as hash tables, queues, 
stacks, bags, dictionaries, and lists. Commonly used collection types may be grouped 
into two groups:

- Indexable collections: such as List that base on the List<T> class. 
- Key/value pair collections: such as Dictionary that bases on the Dictionary<TKey,TValue> class. 

In addition to indexable vs key/value, collections are also grouped into two types in C#: non-generic 
collections and generic collections: [#generic-non_generic-collections]

- Generic Collections: In the System.Collections.Generic namespace, collection classes like 
  List<T>, Dictionary<TKey, TValue>, Queue<T>, Stack<T>, and Hashset<T>. 

- Non-generic Collections: In the System.Collections namespace, the non-generic collection 
  includes non-generic collection types such as ArrayList, SortedList, Stack, Queue, Hashtable, and BitArray. 

Collections vary in how they store, sort, and compare elements, and how they 
perform searches. As for how to choose among the collections to use, the .NET 
fundamentals documentation offers a general guideline by considering several aspects. 
[#selecting-collection-class]_ 


Commonly Used Collection types
--------------------------------

In C#, collection types represent different ways to collect data, such as hash tables, 
queues, stacks, bags, dictionaries, and lists. All collections are based on the 
``ICollection`` or ``ICollection<T>`` **interfaces**, either directly or indirectly. 
``IList`` and ``IDictionary`` and their generic counterparts all derive from these 
two interfaces.

In collections based on IList or directly on ICollection, every element contains 
only a value. These types include: [#commonly-used-types]_

- **Array**
- ArrayList
- **List<T>**
- Queue
- ConcurrentQueue<T>
- Stack
- ConcurrentStack<T>
- LinkedList<T>

In collections based on the ``IDictionary`` interface, every element contains both 
a key and a value. These types include:

- Hashtable
- SortedList
- SortedList<TKey,TValue>
- **Dictionary<TKey,TValue>**
- ConcurrentDictionary<TKey,TValue>

While these collection types (classes) are implemented in C#, you should note that 
they are based on common data structures: [#data_structure-wiki]_ 

- Array: An array is a number of elements in a specific order, typically all of 
  the same type.
- Linked List: A linked list is a linear collection of data elements of any type, 
  called nodes, where each node has itself a value, and points to the next node in 
  the linked list.
- Record: A record (also called tuple or struct) is an aggregate data structure. 
  A record is a value that contains other values, typically in fixed number and 
  sequence and typically indexed by names. 
- Hash Tables: Hash tables, also known as hash maps, are data structures that provide 
  fast retrieval of values based on keys. They use a hashing function to map keys 
  to indexes in an array, allowing for constant-time access in the average case. 
- Graphs: Graphs are collections of nodes connected by edges, representing 
  relationships between entities. 
- Stacks and Queues: Stacks and queues are abstract data types that can be implemented 
  using arrays or linked lists. A stack has two primary operations: push 
  (adds an element to the top of the stack) and pop (removes the topmost element from 
  the stack), that follow the Last In, First Out (LIFO) principle. Queues have two 
  main operations: enqueue (adds an element to the rear of the queue) and dequeue 
  (removes an element from the front of the queue) that follow the First In, First 
  Out (FIFO) principle.  
- Trees: Trees represent a hierarchical organization of elements. A tree consists 
  of nodes connected by edges, with one node being the root and all other nodes 
  forming subtrees.

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#data_structure-wiki] See, e.g., the Data structure `Wikipedia entry <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_structure>`_. 
.. [#data_structure-vs-collection] See a Q&A discussion at `Microsoft <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/answers/questions/1522979/difference-between-data-structure-and-collection-i>`_
.. [#microsoft-collections-and-data_structure] In the .NET fundamentals documentation, the term "data structures" only appears in the article title `Collections and Data Structure <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/collections/>`_ 
.. [#csharp-collections] See C# language reference: `Collections <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/builtin-types/collections>`_
.. [#selecting-collection-class] .NET fundamentals documentation: `Selecting a Collection Class <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/collections/selecting-a-collection-class>`_
.. [#commonly-used-types] .NET fundamentals documentation: `Commonly used collection types <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/collections/commonly-used-collection-types>`_
.. [#generic-non_generic-collections] See `C# Generic & Non-generic Collections <https://www.tutorialsteacher.com/csharp/csharp-collection#:~:text=C%23%20includes%20specialized%20classes%20that,generic%20collections%20and%20generic%20collections.>`_