Introduction: OOP
=============================

Many computer programming languages, such as Java, C++, C#, and Python, are general 
purpose high-level computer programming language and they supports multiple 
programming **paradigms**; which means you can use C# to develop computer programs using 
different styles such as:

- procedural programming: (focused on procedures and functions), 
- object-oriented programming (based on objects and classes), and
- functional programming (emphasizing mathematical functions and immutability).

Object-oriented programming (OOP) is one of the popular programming paradigms. 
The core concept of OOP is **separation of concerns** achieved by using classes and 
objects. Separation of concerns is a design principle to separate a computer program 
into different sections with each section addresses a separate concern. For OOP design, 
the concerns are separated into objects. Further, architectural design patterns like 
`MVC <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Separation_of_concerns>`_ separate presentation and 
data-processing from content.

The most popular model of OOP is a class-based model. In OOP, a class is a 
**template** for creating objects, and an **object** entity is 
an instance of a class. When the individual objects are created, they inherit all 
the **properties and methods** from the class that can be used. In C#, some classes 
(e.g., Console) are defined in the language and users can also define classes (e.g., UI). 

While procedural programming is about writing procedures or methods that perform 
operations on the data, object-oriented programming (OOP) provides a clear structure 
for the code to reduce **complexity** and to make the programs **reusable**. 

The four basic principles of object-oriented programming are:

- **Abstraction**: Modeling the relevant attributes and interactions of entities as classes 
  to define an abstract representation of a system.
- **Encapsulation**: Hiding the internal state and functionality of an object and only 
  allowing access through a public set of functions.
- **Inheritance**: Ability to create new abstractions based on existing abstractions; which  
  enables code **reusability**.
- **Polymorphism**: Ability to implement inherited properties or methods in different 
  ways across multiple abstractions.


To further explain the four pillars of OOP [#oop-techtarget]_: 
The **encapsulation** principle states that all important information is contained inside 
an object and only select information is exposed. The implementation and state of 
each object are privately held inside a defined class. Other objects do not have access 
to this class or the authority to make changes. They are only able to call a list of 
public functions or methods. This characteristic of data hiding provides greater program 
security and avoids unintended data corruption.

The **abstraction** principle states that objects only reveal internal mechanisms that 
are relevant for the use of other objects, hiding any unnecessary implementation code. 
The derived class can have its functionality extended. This concept can help developers 
more easily make additional changes or additions over time.

The **inheritance** principle states that classes can reuse code and properties from 
other classes. Relationships and subclasses between objects can be assigned, 
enabling developers to reuse common logic, while still maintaining a unique hierarchy. 
Inheritance forces more thorough data analysis, reduces development time and ensures 
a higher level of accuracy.

The **polymorphism** principle states that objects are designed to share behaviors, 
and they can take on more than one form. The program determines which meaning or 
usage is necessary for each execution of that object from a parent class, reducing 
the need to duplicate code. A child class is then created, which extends the 
functionality of the parent class. Polymorphism enables different types of objects 
to pass through the same interface.




.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#oop-techtarget] `Definition: Object-oriented programming (OOP) <https://www.techtarget.com/searchapparchitecture/definition/object-oriented-programming-OOP#:~:text=Object%2Doriented%20programming%20(OOP)%20is%20a%20computer%20programming%20model,has%20unique%20attributes%20and%20behavior>`_ 