Abstraction
=================

Abstraction is achieved by ignoring implementation details while focusing on 
essential features. Abstraction can be achieved through the use of either 
**abstract classes** or **interfaces**. 

The most common form of abstraction in OOP is data abstraction, which means a set of 
abstract operations fully defines the behavior of an abstract data object. 
Note that, in general: [#abstract-class_vs_interface]_  

- An abstract class defines what something is (description). Abstract classes can 
  contain implementation of methods, fields, constructors, etc.
- An interface defines that something can do (behavior). Therefore, they only contains 
  method and property prototypes. For example, the interface ``IEnumerable`` 
  means that anything implements IEnumerable is enumerable and its behavior is it 
  can be enumerated.

A class can implement multiple interfaces, but it can only inherit one class 
(abstract or otherwise). 


Abstract Classes
------------------

In C#, the ``abstract`` keyword is used to create abstract classes and abstract methods:

- **Abstract class**: is a restricted class that cannot be used to create objects; instead, 
  it must be **inherited** from a child class to be used.
- **Abstract method**: can **only** be used in an abstract class, and it **does not have a 
  body**. The body is provided by the derived (child) class.

Important characteristics of abstract classes include: 

- Members: An abstract class can contain both **abstract** and **non-abstract** members.
- ``override``: Derived classes that implement ``abstract`` methods must use the 
  ``override`` keyword.
- **Use**: An abstract class cannot be instantiated using a ``new`` keyword; it must be inherited by a 
  derived (child) class in order to be used. 
- **Abstract members**: Abstract members of an abstract class may include methods, properties, or events that 
  **do not have an implementation**, and must be implemented in the derived class.
- If a class contains any abstract members, it must also be marked as abstract.
- **concrete class**: A derived class that implements all of the abstract members of its base class is considered to be a 
  **concrete class**, and can be instantiated.

Here is an example of an abstract class that contains an abstract method in C#:

.. code-block:: 
    :linenos:
    :emphasize-lines: 1, 3

    abstract class Shape
    {
        public abstract double GetArea();
    }

Note that, since an abstract cannot be instantiated, if you try to create an object 
from it::
    
    Shape shape = new Shape();
    
You will receive an error message like (in macOS):

.. code-block:: bash

    tcn85@mac:~/workspace/introcscs/Ch11OOP$ dotnet run
    /Users/tcn85/workspace/introcscs/Ch11OOP/Vehicle.cs(29,23): error CS0144: Cannot create an 
    instance of the abstract type or interface 'Shape' [/Users/tcn85/workspace/introcscs/Ch11OOP/Ch11OOP.csproj]

    The build failed. Fix the build errors and run again.

or in Windows:

.. code-block:: powershell

    PS C:\Users\tcn85\workspace\introcscs\Ch11OOP> dotnet run
    C:\Users\tcn85\workspace\introcscs\Ch11OOP\Vehicle.cs(29,23): error CS0144: Cannot create an 
    instance of the abstract type or interface 'Shape' [C:\Users\tcn85\workspace\introcscs\Ch11OOP\Ch11OOP.csproj]

    The build failed. Fix the build errors and run again.
    PS C:\Users\tcn85\workspace\introcscs\Ch11OOP> 

This abstract class represents a shape, and has a single abstract method called ``GetArea()`` that 
returns the area of the shape. From Shape, you can define different classes inheriting Shape (such as Circle, 
Square, Triangle...). Each child class would implement the ``GetArea()`` method differently since this method is 
abstract and therefore it does not have an implementation and must be implemented in a derived class.

Here is an example of a derived class that implements the GetArea() method:

.. code-block:: csharp

    class Circle : Shape
    {
        private double radius;                  // field (data)

        public Circle(double radius)            // a constructor intaking argument double radius
        {
            this.radius = radius;               // create the variable to be used in the object
        }

        public override double GetArea()        // implementation of the GetArea method from Shape; override
        {
            return Math.PI * radius * radius;
        }
    }

 
    class Program
    {
        static void Main(string[] args)
        {
            Circle circle = new Circle(10);
            double area = circle.GetArea();
            Console.WriteLine(area);            // output: 314.1592653589793      
        }
    }


As another example, see the abstract class and methods defined and executed as follows.

.. code-block:: csharp
    :linenos: 
    :emphasize-lines: 1, 3, 5, 12, 14-17, 25

    abstract class Animal                       // Abstract class
    {
        public abstract void animalSound();     // Abstract method (does not have a body)
        
        public void sleep()                     // Regular method
        {
            Console.WriteLine("Zzz");
        }
    }

    
    class Pig : Animal                          // Derived class (inherit from Animal)
    {
        public override void animalSound()      // method implementation body of animalSound(); override 
        {
            Console.WriteLine("The pig says: wee wee");
        }
    }


    class Program
    {
        static void Main(string[] args)
        {
            Pig myPig = new Pig();              // Create a Pig object
            myPig.animalSound();                // Call the implemented abstract method: 
                                                // output The pig says: wee wee
            myPig.sleep();                      // Call the regular method (in base class)
        }                                       // output: Zzz
        
    }


Abstraction is a powerful modular design that allows for a **separation of concerns** 
between the interface/abstract class and the implementation of a class. It helps to 
reduce complexity and improve maintainability by allowing changes to be made to the 
implementation without affecting the overall behavior of the class. In this example 
below, you see that this time a ``Rectangle`` class is created to inherit the 
**abstract class** ``Shape`` and two **abstract methods** are implemented. 

.. code-block:: csharp
    :linenos:

    abstract class Shape
    {
        public abstract double GetArea();
        public abstract double GetPerimeter();
    }

    class Rectangle : Shape
    {
        private double width;
        private double height;

        public Rectangle(double width, double height)
        {
            this.width = width;
            this.height = height;
        }

        public override double GetArea()
        {
            return width * height;
        }

        public override double GetPerimeter()
        {
            return 2 * (width + height);
        }
    }


interfaces
-------------

Interfaces is another way of achieving abstraction in C#. An interface is a completely 
"abstract class", which can only contain abstract methods and properties 
(with empty bodies) without any implementation. For example, the following code is 
an interface definition that does not have any method implementation (body, ``{}``) [#interfaces-w3school]_:: 

    interface Animal 
    {
        void animalSound();     ///// interface method (does not have a body)
        void run();             ///// interface method (does not have a body)
    }

Note that: 

#. It is considered good practice to start with the letter "``I``" at the beginning of an 
   interface name to note that it is an interface rather than a class.
#. Interfaces can contain properties and methods, but not fields.
#. By default, members of an interface are ``abstract`` and ``public``.
#. To use the interface methods, the interface must be "implemented" 
   (kinda like inherited) by a child class using the ``:`` symbol (just like with 
   inheritance).  
#. You do not have to use the override keyword when implementing an interface.

For example:

.. code-block:: csharp
    :linenos:
    :emphasize-lines: 1, 3, 7, 20

    interface IAnimal 
    {
      void animalSound();           // interface method (does not have a body)
    }
    
    
    class Pig : IAnimal             // Pig "implements" the IAnimal interface
    {
      public void animalSound() 
      {                             // The body of animalSound() is provided here
        Console.WriteLine("The pig says: wee wee");
      }
    }
    
    class Program 
    {
      static void Main(string[] args) 
      {
        Pig myPig = new Pig();      // Create a Pig object
        myPig.animalSound();        // use the implemented abstract method
      }
    }





.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#abstract-class_vs_interface] See this question at `StackOverflow <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/15178219/whats-the-difference-between-an-abstract-class-and-an-interface>`_. 