.. index:: path

.. _path-strings:

Path Strings
====================

When a program is running, there is alway a *current directory* (or, 
**present working directory**, ``pwd``). Files in the present working directory can 
be referred to by their simple names, e.g., *sample.txt*, so 
project files can be referred to by their simple names because they are in the same 
directory.

Referring to files not in the current directory is more complicated.  
You should be aware from using the Windows Explorer or the macOS Finder that
files and directories are located in a hierarchy of directories in the
file system. On a Mac, the file system is unified in 
one hierarchy. On Windows, each storage drive has its own hierarchy.

.. index:: / ; path separator
   single: \ ; path separator

Files are generally referred to by a chain of directories before
the final name of the file desired. A *path string* (or simply **path**) is used
to represent such a sequence of names. Elements of the directory chain are separated
by operating system specific punctuation symbols: In Windows the separator is 
backslash, ``\``, and on a Mac it is (forward) slash, ``/``. For example, on a Mac the path 

.. code-block:: none
    
   /Users/anh 
   
starts with a /, meaning the **root** or top directory in the hierarchy, and Users is
a subdirectory, and anh is a subdirectory of Users (in this case the home directory
for the user with login anh). It is similar with Windows, except there may be a drive 
in the beginning, and the separator is a \\, so

.. code-block:: none
   
   C:\Windows\System32

is on C: drive; Windows is a subdirectory of the root directory \\, and System32 is
a subdirectory of Windows. Each drive in Windows has a separate file hierarchy 
underneath it.

.. index:: path; absolute

Paths starting from the root of a file system, with ``\`` or ``/`` are called
**absolute paths** or **full paths** because they begin with the root of the file hierarchy. 
Since there is always a current directory, it makes sense to allow a path to be *relative* 
to the current directory. In that case do *not* start with the slash that would
indicate the root directory. For example, if the current directory is
your user home directory, you likely have a subdirectory :file:`Downloads`, and the 
:file:`Downloads` directory might contain :file:`examples.zip`. From the home directory, 
this file could be referred to as :file:`Downloads\\examples.zip` in Windows or 
:file:`Downloads/examples.zip` on a Mac.


Referring to files in the current directory just by their plain file name is
actually an example of using relative paths.

.. index:: .. parent folder

With relative paths, you sometimes want to move up the directory hierarchy:  ``..``
(two periods) refers to the directory one level up the chain.  

For example, suppose you have a ``data`` directory under your ``introcscs`` directory, 
and you place your sample.txt in the data directory. When running your project from the 
project directory (Ch07File), you would refer to the sample.txt file to read as 
:file:`..\\data\\sample.txt` in Windows or 
:file:`../data/sample.txt` in macOS. Follow this one step at a time:  
Starting from the :file:`Ch07File` project folder, where the program is running,
go up one folder (:file:`..`) to the ``introcscs`` folder, then down into the 
:file:`data` folder, and refer to the :file:`sample.txt` file in that folder.  

.. index:: . ; current folder

Occasionally you need to
refer explicitly to the current directory:  It is referred to as :file:`.`. (a single
period).

.. index:: Path class

Paths in C#
--------------

The differing versions of paths for Windows and a Mac are a pain to deal with. Luckily C#
abstracts away the differences.  It has a ``Path`` class in the ``System.IO`` 
namespace that provides many handy functions for dealing with paths in 
an operating system independent way:

For one thing, C# knows the path separator character for your operating system,
``Path.DirectorySeparatorChar``.
   
More useful is the function ``Path.Combine``, which takes any number of string parameters
for sequential parts of a path, and creates a single string appropriate for the
current operating system.  For example,
``Path.Combine("bin", "Debug")`` will return ``"bin\Debug"`` or ``"bin/debug"``
as appropriate.
``Path.Combine("..", "data", "sample.txt")`` will return a string with characters
``..\data\sample.txt`` or ``../data/sample.txt``.  

Even if you know you are going to be on Windows, file paths are a problem because
``\`` is the string escape character. To enter the Windows path solve explicitly
you would need to have ``"..\\data\\sample.txt"``, or the raw string prefix,
``@`` can come to the rescue:  ``@"..\data\sample.txt"``.

Path strings are used by the :ref:`directory-class` and by the :ref:`file-class`. 
You can look at the ``Path`` class in the C# Language Reference  
for many other operations with path strings.

Directory Class
----------------

The ``Directory`` class is in the ``System.IO`` namespace.
Directories in the file system are referenced by :ref:`path-strings`.
You can look at the MSDN documentation for a wide variety of functions in the
``Directory`` class including ones to list all the files in a directory 
or to check if a path string represents an actual directory.
