.. index::  class; Contact
   Contact class 
   instance of a class
   
.. _class:

Introduction to Class 
============================================

Overview
----------

To understand class and object-oriented programming (OOP), some important basic concepts learn first inlcude: 

- **Class**: A class is a blueprint, prototype, or template. 
- **Class Members**: In C#, a class contains members, which include **fields**, properties, **methods**, and events.
- **Class Instance**: An ``object`` is an ``instance`` of a class. Namely, an object is created based on a 
  class and therefore is an instance of that class. An object can be created using the ``new`` keyword. 

There are related terminology that you will see about class and OOP:

- **Field**: A field is a variable of any type that is declared directly in a class or struct. Fields are 
  members of their containing type. A field stores a piece of data within an object. It acts like a 
  variable and may have a different value for each instance of a type. [#field-property]_
- **Property**: Properties expose fields. Fields should (almost always) be kept private to a class and accessed via 
  get and set properties. 
- The **this** Keyword: In C#, the this keyword refers to the current instance of a class.
- **Reference Types**: A type that is defined as a class is a reference type. Other types include: interface, struct, delegate, or enum.
- **Constructor**: In C#, a constructor is called when an object is created to set default values. A constructor must have the 
  **same name** as the enclosing class. Using constructor is not obligatory in C#. If no constructors are specified in a class, the compiler 
  automatically creates a parameterless constructor.

    

Declaring Classes
--------------------

To declare a class, you need to use the ``class`` keyword and give a unique ``identifier`` (name) to the class. For example, 
you want to create a customer class to include some data and methods in one unit::

   //[access modifier] - [class] - [identifier]
   public class Customer
   {
      // Fields, properties, methods and events go here...
   }

Attributes to be considered when creating a class include:

- Access Modifiers: The default access for a class type is internal. Basic levels of access for a class include [#access-levels]_ :
    - **public**: Access is not restricted. Anyone code can create instances of this class. 
    - **protected**: Access is limited to the containing class or types derived from the containing class.
    - **internal**: Access is limited to the current assembly. [#internal-assembly]_
    - **private**: Access is limited to the containing type.
- Class Identifier: A unique name for the class. An identifier is the name you assign to a type (class, interface, struct, delegate, or enum), 
  member, variable, or namespace. An identifier begins with a letter or underscore. As a convention, use PascalCase for class names and method names.
- Class Body: The class body is surrounded by { }. The behavior and data are defined in the class body, including **fields**, properties, **methods**, and events on a class and
  are collectively referred to as **class members**.
- Base Class or Super Class: Optional. Name of the class's superclass; preceded by a colon (:). 
- Interfaces: Interface names implemented by the class; preceded by a colon (:).


Using a Class
---------------

In the following example, there is a class called ``Program`` with a Main method. We define another class 
called ``DoMath`` and then, in the Main method of the Program class, 1) instantiate an object of the DoMath class by 
using the ``new`` keyword and 2) use the dot notation (``.``) to access a method defined in DoMath::

   internal class Program
   {
      static void Main(string[] args)
      {
         DoMath doMath = new DoMath();    // create an object using the new keyword
         int aSum = doMath.Sum(2, 2);     // use the [object].[method] syntax to use the methods 
         Console.WriteLine(aSum);         // output 4
      }
   }

   class DoMath                           // class accessability level is default to internal 
   {
      public int Sum(int num1, int num2)
      {
         var total = num1 + num2;
         return total;
      }
   } 

In addition to store data as local variables and call methods in the same class,
now we have alternatives for storing and accessing data in the methods within
a new class that we write. Just like using the ``UI`` class or ``Random`` class, we 
now can better design, extend, and organize program functionalities.

When you use classes like StreamReader, you create a new StreamReader object using the ``new`` 
keyword and then use the ``ReadLine`` method (example in csharprepl)::

   > StreamReader reader = new StreamReader("ui.cs");
   > string line = reader.ReadLine();                
   > line                                            
   "using System;"
   > 

As you can see, we are using the ``member access operator (.)`` to access a member 
of a namespace or a type. Calls to instance methods are always attached to a specific object.
That has always been the part through the ``.`` of

   *object*\ ``.``\ *method*\ ``(``  ... ``)``
   

.. index:: OOP; instance variable
   instance variable
   variable; instance
   private; instance variable
   

.. Constructor

.. Instance Variables
.. ----------------------



.. index:: OOP; constructor
   constructor


Constructors
----------------

The constructor is a special method in the class: 

#. Its ``name`` is the same as the name of its type. For example, if we create a class named ``Contact``, then the 
   constructor method is also called ``Contact``.
#. Its method ``signature`` includes only an optional access modifier, the method name, and its parameter list
#. Its method ``signature`` has ``no return type`` (and *no* ``static``). Implicitly you are creating a default object from the class.
#. The constructor can have parameters like a regular method. That means giving values to its fields. For example, 
   you may want to store this *state* (the current condition of a system, such as the values of the variables) in 
   instance variables ``name``, ``phone`` and ``email`` if you are creating a Contact type:  

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/contact1/contact1.cs
   :start-after: constructor 
   :end-before: getter

While the local variables in the formal parameters disappear after the constructor terminates,
we want the data to live on as the state of the object. In order to remember state after the 
constructor terminates, we must *make sure the information gets into the instance variables* 
for the object. This is the basic operation of most constructors: Copy desired formal
parameters in to initialize the state in the fields. That is all our simple
code above does.

To further explain how constructors work, take a look at the following code::

   internal class Program
   {
      static void Main(string[] args)
      {
         CheckID check = new CheckID("taylor swift");
      }
   }

   class CheckID
   {
      public string name;           // this is an instance field (variable)
      public CheckID(string name)
      {
         this.name = name;          // The "this" keyword refers to the current instance of the class
      }

      public void PrintResult()
      {
         // ... if ID for this name exists ...
         Console.WriteLine($"{name} has an existing ID!"); // using the "name" variable in method
      }                             // output "taylor swift has an existing ID!"
      // ....
      // ....
   }

.. Note that ``name``, ``phone`` and ``email`` are *not* declared as 
.. local variables.  They refer to the *instance* variables, but we are *not* using 
.. full object notation: an object reference and a
.. dot, followed by the field.  

.. So far always we have always been referring to a built-in type of object
.. defined in a different class, like ``arrayObject.Length``.  
.. The constructor is *creating* an object,
.. and the use of the bare instance variable names is understood to be giving 
.. values to the instance variables in this Contact object 
.. that is being constructed.
.. Inside a constructor 
.. and also inside an instance method 
.. (discussed below)
.. C# allows this shorthand notation without ``someObject.``.

.. index::  OOP; instance method


Static Classes & Methods
----------------------------

In some conditions you may want to create **static classes** that provide static methods without 
instantiation. That means you do not need to use the ``new`` operator keyword to create a variable 
of the class type. Also, without the class instance variable, you access the members of a static 
class by using the class name itself. For example, if you have a static class called SomeMath::

   static class SomeMath
   {
      public static int Sum(int a, int b)    // a public static method
      {
         return a + b;
      }
   }

To use the Sum method in the SomeMath class, you call it directly without creating a new object::

   internal class Program
   {
      static void Main(string[] args)
      {  
         int aSum = SomeMath.Sum(2, 2);
         Console.WriteLine(aSum);      // output 4
      }
   }

As another example, in the .NET Class Library, the ``static`` `System.Math <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.math>`_ 
class contains methods that perform mathematical operations, without any requirement to store or 
retrieve data that is unique to a particular instance of the `Math <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.math>`_ 
class. You can use the math methods directly in your code by referring to the static class name ``Math``::

   double dub = -3.14;
   Console.WriteLine(Math.Abs(dub));               // 3.14
   Console.WriteLine(Math.Floor(dub));             // -4
   Console.WriteLine(Math.Round(Math.Abs(dub)));   // 3




Properties
------------

.. note:: 

   Although the content are still valid, this section will be updated later to reflect 
   the more current syntax and discussion of properties such as in `Using Properties <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/classes-and-structs/using-properties#the-get-accessor>`_. 

A property is a member that provides a flexible mechanism to read, write, or compute 
the value of a data field. Properties appear as public data members, but they're 
implemented as special methods called accessors.

.. index:: OOP; getter
   getter method 

.. _getters:

Getters
~~~~~~~~~

In instance methods you have an extra way of getting data in and out of the method: 
Reading or setting instance variables (fields). The simplest methods do nothing but reading 
or setting instance variables. We start with those:

The ``private`` in front
of the field declarations was important to keep code outside the
class from messing with the values.  On the other hand we do want
others to be able to *inspect* the name, phone and email,
so how do we do that?  Use **public methods**. 

Since the fields are accessible anywhere *inside* the class's instance methods, 
and public methods can be used from *outside* the class, we can simply code

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/contact1/contact1.cs
   :start-after: getter
   :end-before: labels

These methods allow one-way communication of the name, phone and email 
values out from the object.
These are examples
of a simple category of methods:  A *getter* simply returns the value of a part
of the object's state, without changing the object at all.  

Note again that there is no ``static`` in the method heading.  
The field value for the *current* Contact is returned.

A standard convention that we are following:
Have getter methods names start with "Get", 
followed by the name of the data to be returned. 

In this first simple version of Contact we add one further method, to
print all the contact information with labels.

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/contact1/contact1.cs
   :start-after: labels
   :end-before: chunk

Again, we use the instance variable names, plugging them into a format string.  
Remember the ``@`` syntax
for multiline strings gives us verbatim string literals that are interpreted literally 
without escape sequences.

You can see and see the entire Contact class 
in :repsrc:`contact1/contact1.cs`.

This is your first complete class defining a new type of object.  
Look carefully to get used to the features introduced, before we add
more ideas:

.. index:: example; Contact version 2

.. index:: OOP; this
   this instance 


This Object
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We will be making an elaboration on the Contact class from here on.  We introduce
new parts individually, but the whole code is in 
:repsrc:`contact2/contact2.cs`.

The current object is *implicit* inside a constructor or instance method definition,
but it can be referred to *explicitly*.  It is called ``this``.  
In a constructor or instance method, ``this`` is automatically a legal
local variable to reference.  
You usually do not need to 
use it explicitly, but you could.   For example the current ``Contact`` object's
``name`` field could be referred to as either ``this.name`` or the shorter plain ``name``.
In our next version of the Contact class we will see several places where 
an explicit ``this`` is useful.

In the first version of the constructor, repeated here,

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/contact1/contact1.cs
   :start-after: constructor 
   :end-before: getter

we used different names for the instance variables and the formal
parameter names that we used to initialize the instance variables.  We
chose reasonable names, but we are adding extra names that we are not going
to use later, and it can be confusing.  The most obvious names for the formal
parameters that will initialize the instance variables are the *same* names.

If we are not careful, there is a problem with that.  An instance variable,
however named, and a local variable are not the same.  This is 
nonsensical::

      public Contact(string name, string phone, string email) 
      {
         name = name; // ????
         ...

Logically we want this pseudo-code in the constructor:

       instance variable ``name``  ``=`` local variable ``name`` 

We have to disambiguate the two uses.  The compiler always looks for
*local* variable identifiers *first*, so plain ``name`` will refer to the local 
variable ``name`` declared in the formal parameter list.  
This local variable identifier  *hides* the matching instance variable
identifier.  We have to do something else to refer to the instance variable.
The explicit ``this`` object comes to the rescue:  ``this.name`` refers to 
a part of this object.  It must refer to the 
instance variable, not the local variable.  Our alternate constructor is:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/contact2/contact2.cs
   :start-after: constructor 
   :end-before: getter


Setters
~~~~~~~~~

The original version of Contact makes a Contact object be
*immutable*: Once it is created with the constructor, there is no way
to change its internal state.  The only assignments to the private
instance variables are the ones in the constructor.  In real life
people can change their email address.  We might like to allow that
with our Contact objects.  Users can read the data in a Contact with the 
*getter* methods.  Now we need *setter* methods.  The naming conventions
are similar:  start with "Set".  In this case we must supply the new data,
so setter methods need a parameter:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/contact2/contact2.cs
   :start-after: setter methods
   :end-before: chunk

In ``SetPhone``, like in our original constructor, we illustrate using a
*new* name for the parameter that sets the instance variable.  For 
comparison we use the alternate identifier matching approach in the 
other setter:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/contact2/contact2.cs
   :start-after: SetEmail
   :end-before: chunk

Now we can alter the contents of a Contact::

     Contact c1 = new Contact("Marie Ortiz", "773-508-7890", "mortiz2@luc.edu");
     c1.SetEmail ("maria.ortiz@gmail.com");
     c1.SetPhone("555-555-5555");
     c1.Print(); 

would print

..  code-block:: none

    Name:  Marie Ortiz
    Phone: 555-555-5555
    Email: maria.ortiz@gmail.com


.. _toString:

.. index::
   single:  ToString
   single:  override


ToString Override
---------------------

All object in C# have a ``ToString`` method because all types inherit from the base class 
System.Object. It converts an object to its string representation for display. It is used 
to perform internal string concatenation and Write. 

Default ToString behavior
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, ToString returns returns the ``fully qualified name`` of the type of the Object. For example::

.. code-block:: csharp
   
   :linenos:
   :emphasize-lines: 17

   namespace IntroCSCS
   {
      class Animal
      {
         public string name;
         public Animal(string name)
         {
            this.name = name;            }
         }
      }

      public class TestAnimal
      {
         public static void Main()
         {
            Animal frog = new Animal("Froggy");

            Console.WriteLine(frog.ToString());    ///// print: IntroCSCS.Animal; Animal is the type
            Console.WriteLine(frog.name);          ///// print: Froggy 
         }
      }
   }

Overriding ToString
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Think more generally about string representations:  
All the built-in type values can be concatenated into strings with the '+' operator,
or displayed with ``Console.Write``. We would like that behavior with our custom types, 
too. 

Types frequently ``override`` the Object.ToString method to provide a more suitable string 
representation or display of a particular type instead of the default fully qualified type name. 
For example:

.. code-block:: csharp
   :linenos:
   :emphasize-lines: 6, 18

   class Employee
   {
      public string Name { get; set; }
      public int Salary { get; set; }

      public override string ToString()
      {
         return "Employee: " + Name + " " + Salary;      ///// returns object data  
      }
   }

   class Test
   {
      public static void Main()
      {
         Employee employee = new Employee { Name = "John", Salary = 100000 };
         Console.WriteLine(employee.ToString());   ///// print: Employee: John 100000
         Console.WriteLine(employee);              ///// print: Employee: John 100000

      }
   }

Print() Customization 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can further customize ToString override. For example, in addition to the following ``ToString`` 
override with format:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/introcs/contact2/contact2.cs
   :language: csharp
   :start-after: ToString chunk
   :end-before: chunk
   :dedent: 6

See what the ToString method does now: it uses the object state (e.g., the values of variables name, phone, and 
email in this case) and implicitly covert and *return* a single string representation of the object. 

We might like to have a convenience method ``Print`` using ``ToString``. We want one instance 
method, ``Print`` to call another instance method ``ToString`` for the *same* object::

      public void Print()  
      {
         Console.WriteLine(ToString()); 
         // Console.WriteLine(this);         ///// "this" returns the same as ToString()
      }






.. When we use ``Console.WriteLine`` on this current object, which is *not*
.. already a string, there is an automatic call to ``ToString``.



.. .. index:: redeclaring instance variables error
..    compiler error; before error in text
..    instance variable; redeclaring error


.. .. _local-variables-hiding-instance-variables:

.. Local Variables Hiding Instance Variables
.. ------------------------------------------

.. A common error is for students to try to declare the instance variables twice,
.. once in the regular instance variable declarations, 
.. *outside of any constructor or method* and then again *inside* a 
.. constructor, like::

..       public Contact(string fullName, string phoneNumber, string emailAddress) 
..       {
..          string name = fullName;      // LOGICAL ERROR!
..          string phone = phoneNumber;  // LOGICAL ERROR!
..          string email = emailAddress; // LOGICAL ERROR
..       }

.. This is deadly.  It is worse than redeclaring a local variable, which at least will 
.. trigger a compiler error.

.. ..  warning::

..     Instance variable *only* get declared outside of all
..     functions and constructors.  Same-name 
..     local variable declarations hide the
..     instance variables, but *compile just fine*.  The local variables disappear
..     after the constructor ends, leaving the instance variables 
..     *without* your desired initialization. Instead the hidden instance variables 
..     just get the default initialization, ``null`` for an object
..     or 0 for a number.
    
.. There is a related strange compiler error.  This is not likely to happen frequently, 
.. but thinking through its logic (or illogic) could be helpful in understanding
.. local and instance variables: 
.. Generally when you get a compiler error, the error is at or *before* the location the
.. error is referenced, but with local variables covering instance variables, 
.. the real cause can come later in the text of the method.  Below, when you first
.. refer to ``r`` in ``Badnames``, it appears to be correctly referring to the
.. instance variable ``r``::

..     class ForwardError
..     {
..         private int r = 3;
        
..         // ...
        
..         void BadNames(int a, int b)
..         {
..             int n = a*r + b; // legal in text *just* to here; instance field r
..             //...
..             int r = a % b; // r declaration makes *earlier* line wrong
..             //...
..         }
    
.. The compiler scans through *all* of ``BadNames``, and sees the ``r`` declared locally
.. in its scope.
.. The error may be marked on the earlier line, where the compiler then assumes 
.. ``r`` is the later declared local ``int`` variable, not the instance variable.
.. The error it sees is a local variable used before declaration. 

.. This is based on a real student example.  
.. This example points to a second issue: using variable names that 
.. that are too short and not descriptive of the variable meaning, and so may
.. easily be the same name as something unrelated.

.. .. index:: lifetime; vs. scope
..    scope; vs. lifetime
   
.. Lifetime and Scope Exercise/Example
.. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. Be careful to distinguish lifetime and scope.  Either a local variable or
.. an instance variable can be temporarily out of scope, but still be alive.
.. Can you construct an example to illustrate that?  One of ours is
.. :repsrc:`lifetime_scope/lifetime_scope.cs`.



.. rubric:: footnote

.. [#access-levels] `Accessibility Levels (C# Reference) <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/keywords/accessibility-levels>`_.
.. [#field-property] See the answer at `What is the difference between a field and a property? <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/295104/what-is-the-difference-between-a-field-and-a-property>`_
.. [#internal-assembly] See `internal <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/keywords/internal>`_