Intro/Boolean
=================================== 

Selection Statements
---------------------------------

Selection statements, sometimes referred to as conditional statements, 
are one of the three basic constructs (sequence, selection, iteration) in programming. 
Selection statements provide the logic to perform decision-making: taking different 
actions based on different conditions. When selecting from possible paths for execution, 
the decisions are made based on the value of an expression.

C# has the following conditional statements:

- The ``if`` statement specifies a block of code to be executed, only if a provided Boolean 
  expression evaluates to ``true``. 
- The ``if-else`` statement allows you to choose which of the two code paths to follow 
  based on a Boolean expression.
- The ``else if`` statement specifies a new ``condition`` to ``test``.
- ``switch`` statement selects from a list of code to execute based on a pattern match with an expression.

The basic syntax for an if statement is:

.. code-block:: 
  :caption: Syntax of an if statement

  if (condition) 
  {
    // block of code to be executed if the condition is True
  }

where the parenthesized condition of the if statement is a Boolean expression, named after 19th century mathematician 
George Boole.


Boolean Data Type
---------------------

The parenthesized condition of the if statement is a **Boolean expression**, 
also referred to as **relational expression**. 
Boolean expressions are used for control flow statements. In computing, an expression 
always produce a value. The key characteristic of Boolean expressions 
is that they always evaluate to either true or false (or Yes vs. No, On vs. Off, or 0 vs. 1). 
This binary feature is represented as the Boolean binary data type (type ``bool`` in C# with 
possible values of ``true`` or ``false``). 

In ``csharprepl``, we can perform some quick tests on Boolean data:

.. code-block:: 

  > bool isRollaQuiet = true;      

  > bool isChicagoClose = false;

  > isRollaQuiet
  true
  > isChicagoClose
  false
  > 

You should run a more formal test in VS Code to practice coding. 
For example, you may create a method for this test like:

.. note::
  In this example, we are calling the method Rolla() in class BooleanExpression by 
  issuing ``BooleanExpression.Rolla()`` because it's a static method. Also note that 
  Rolla() is placed in another class. This is a demonstration to show you that we 
  can call methods in another class as long as they are static.  


.. code-block:: 

  namespace Program
  {

    class Program
    {
      static void Main(string[] args)
      {
        BooleanExpression.Rolla();            // calling static method
      }
    }

    internal class BooleanExpression         
    {
      internal static void Rolla()
      {
        bool isRollaQuiet = true;
        bool isChicagoClose = false;
        Console.WriteLine(isRollaQuiet);      // Outputs True
        Console.WriteLine(isChicagoClose);    // Outputs False
      }
    }
  }

And the output of this code:

.. code-block:: console

  tychen@mac:~/workspaces/workspace/introcscs/Chapter04$ dotnet run
  True
  False
  tychen@mac:~/workspaces/workspace/introcscs/Chapter04$


Boolean Expressions
-------------------

Since a boolean expression would return a boolean value of either ``true`` or ``false``, 
we can use boolean expressions to return boolean values in ``conditional testing`` to build 
logic in selection/conditional statements. For that we use ``comparison operators`` (``==``, 
``!=``, ``>``, ``<``, ``>=``, ``<=``). Note that:

- The ``<`` , ``>`` , ``<=`` , and ``>=`` comparison operators are also known as 
  ``relational operators`` and are supported by all integral and floating-point 
  numeric types. 
- The ``==`` (equality) and ``!=`` (inequality) operators are ``equality operators`` and they 
  check if their operands are equal or not. Value types are equal when their value contents 
  (e.g., numerical values or string values) are equal. Reference types are equal when the two 
  variables refer to the same storage. 
- The ``char`` type also supports comparison operators by comparing  
  the corresponding character codes.

Consider the following sample boolean expressions in the print statements:

.. code-block:: 

  Console.WriteLine(7.0 < 5.1);   // output: False
  Console.WriteLine(7.0 > 5.1);   // output: True
  Console.WriteLine(7.0 <= 5.1);   // output: False
  Console.WriteLine(7.0 >= 5.1);   // output: True

  int a = 1 + 2 + 3;
  int b = 6;
  Console.WriteLine(a == b);  // output: True

  char c1 = 'a';
  char c2 = 'A';
  Console.WriteLine(c1 == c2);  // output: False

Reference types will be discussed in subsequent chapters and the following example 
is provided here for your reference:

.. code-block:: 
  :linenos:
  :emphasize-lines: 15, 16

  public class ReferenceTypesEquality
  {
      public class MyClass
      {
          private int id;

          public MyClass(int id) => this.id = id;
      }

      public static void Main()
      {
          var a = new MyClass(1);
          var b = new MyClass(1);
          var c = a;
          Console.WriteLine(a == b);  // output: False
          Console.WriteLine(a == c);  // output: True
      }
  }

Understanding boolean expressions above should give you a good sense of how 
conditional/select statement syntax works:

.. code-block:: 
  :caption: Syntax of an if statement

  if (condition) 
  {
    // block of code to be executed if the condition is True
  }

The ``condition`` is a ``Boolean expression``, which will evaluate to either ``true`` or 
``false``. The parentheses is a testing construct. If the testing construct results to 
``true``, then the code block follows will be executed. Otherwise, the code block 
follows will not be executed. 