Lab 04
===============

Create a dotnet console app project called Chapter04. The namespace of this 
project is not important at this point of time but let us call it IntroCSCS. 
The class name of this project is Chapter04. You will only use the Main() 
method to execute the code and you will prepare methods in the same class to 
be called from the Main() method. 

Boolean Expressions
----------------------



int x = 5;
x;
x == 5;
x == 6;
x;
x != 6;
x = 6;
6 == x;
6 != x;
"hi" == "h" + "i";
"HI" != "hi";
string s = "Hello";
string t = "HELLO";
s == t;
s.ToUpper() == t;


Simple If Exercise
----------------------

Think of two different inputs you could give that would make the
execution of the code fragment proceed differently. What would happen in
each case?  (Assume we have access to the class UIF that prints the prompt line, 
intake the value, and turn the input into proper data type.) 

a. Consider::

       string v = UIF.PromptLine("Enter a word: ");
       if (v.Length > 3) {
          v = v + v;
       }
       Console.WriteLine("Now we have " + v);

#. Consider::

       int x = UIF.PromptInt("Enter a integer: ");
       Console.Write("The magnitude of " + x + " is ");
       if (x < 0) {
          x = -x;
       }
       Console.WriteLine(x);


If-else Exercise
----------------------

Think of two different inputs you could give that would make the
execution of the code fragment proceed differently. What would happen in
each case?  (Assume we have access to the class UIF.) 

a. Consider::

       string v = UIF.PromptLine("Enter a word: ");
       if (v.Length > 3) {
          v = v + v;
          Console.WriteLine("Now we have " + v);
       }
       else {
          Console.WriteLine("We still have " + v);
       }

#. Consider::

       int x = UIF.PromptInt("Enter a integer: ");
       Console.Write("The magnitude of " + x + " is ");
       if (x < 0) {
          Console.WriteLine(-x);
       }
       else {
          Console.WriteLine(x);
       }



Graduate Exercise
----------------------

Write a program, ``graduate.cs``, that prompts students for how
many credits they have. Print whether of not they have enough
credits for graduation. (At Loyola University Chicago 120 credits
are needed for graduation.)


Calculate Weekly Wages
-------------------------

Given a person’s work hours for the week and regular hourly wage, 
calculate the total pay for the week, taking into account overtime. 
Hours worked over 40 are overtime, paid at 1.5 times the normal rate. 
This is a natural place for a method enclosing the calculation.

Please prepare a method in class Chapter04 called CalcWeeklyWages that 
would execute successfully when the following execution is performed in the 
Main() method of class Chapter04::

   // Calculate Wages
   Console.Write("Enter hours worked: ");
   double hours = double.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
   Console.Write("Enter dollars paid per hour: ");
   double wage = double.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
   double total = CalcWeeklyWages(hours, wage);
   Console.WriteLine(
      "Wages for {0} hours at ${1:F2} per hour are ${2:F2}.",
      hours, wage, total);


https://github.com/mstbit/introcs-csharp-examples/blob/master/wages1/wages1.cs

