.. _Simple-if-Statements:
    
``if`` and ``if-else`` Statements
====================================


Simple ``if`` Statements
---------------------------

The ``if`` statement specifies a block of C# code to be executed if a condition is True.

.. code-block:: 
  :caption: Syntax of an if statement

  if (condition) 
  {
    // block of code to be executed if the condition is True
  }

.. note::
   Note that C# is case sensitive, so ``If`` is not the same as ``if``. "If" or "IF" will 
   generate an error. 

In ``if`` statements, the comparison operators [#f1]_ (``>``, ``<``, ``>=``, 
``<=``, ``==``, and ``!=``) are used to evaluate the comparison expressions to derive a value of 
either ``true`` or ``false`` from the Boolean expression.  

The first step to learn about the ``if`` statements is to perform some tests on the operators 
in ``csharprepl`` such as::

   if (20 > 10) 
   {
      Console.WriteLine("20 is greater than 10");
   }

with the output::

   20 is greater than 10

When coding, we often play with variables rather than simple values. Observe the 
following code and test it in csharprepl to practice ``if`` statements with variables::

   int num1 = 20;
   int num2 = 18;
   if (num1 > num2) 
   {
      Console.WriteLine("num1 is greater than num2");
   }


Consider simple arithmetic comparisons that directly translate from math into C#. 
In csharprepl, enter::

    int num = 11; 

Now think of which of these expressions below are true and which false, 
and then enter each one into your csharp session to test::

    2 < 5
    3 > 7
    num > 10 
    2*x < num 

You see that the expressions evaluate to either ``true`` or ``false``. These are 
the only possible *Boolean* values. 


Run the example program below. Try it at least twice, with
inputs: 30 and then 55. As you can see, you get different results,
depending on the input. The main code is:

.. code-block:: 
   :linenos:

   namespace IntroCSCS
    
      class Chapter04
      {
         static void Main(string[] args)
         {
            Weight();
         }

         public static void Weight()
         {
            Console.Write("How many pounds does your suitcase weigh? ");
            double weight = double.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
            if (weight > 50)
            {
               Console.WriteLine("There is a $25 charge for luggage that heavy.");
            }
            Console.WriteLine("Thank you for your business.");
         }
      
   }

In this code, 

- #7: The Main() method in the Chapter04 class called the Weight() method. 
- #14: the ``if`` statement in the Weight() method test the condition inside the parentheses. 
- If the condition is true that the weight is greater than 50, then the code block #15-17 would run, 
  printing that there will be a $25 charge. 
- #18: ``No matter`` whether the if statement (#14-17) runs or not, print the "thank you" message. 
  
  
You can see from this code that:

#. The general C# syntax for a simple ``if`` statement is:

   .. code-block:: none

      if (condition)
      {
         // statement(s)
      }

#. If the condition is ``true``, then ``execute`` the statement(s) in braces. If the
   condition is ``not true``, then ``skip`` the statements in braces.
#. The ``condition`` is an ``expression`` that evaluates to either true or false, 
   of type-boolean.  
#. An ``if`` statement only affects the normal sequential order *inside* the ``if`` 
   statement itself (e.g., skipping the extra charge block when the condition is not true 
   and still print the "thank you" line. 


Another code fragment of banking account transaction as an example::

   if (balance < 0) 
   {
      transfer = -balance; 
      // transfer enough from the backup account: 
      backupAccount = backupAccount - transfer;
      balance = balance + transfer;
   }

The assumption
in the example above is that if an account goes negative, it is
brought back to 0 by transferring money from a backup account. 
Note that rhe choice is between **doing something** (if the
condition is ``true``) or **nothing** (if the condition is ``false``).
Often there is a choice of **two possibilities**, only one of which
will be done, depending on the truth of a condition.


``if-else`` Statements
--------------------------

Since we can usually start analyzing a problem by coming up with two possibilities, 
it makes sense to add the alternative action to the code, which makes the ``if-else`` statements. 

The general C# |if-else| syntax is:

| ``if (`` *condition* ``) {``   
|    statement(s) for if-true  
| ``}``
| ``else {``
|    statement(s) for if-false 
| ``}``

Let us start by running the following example code (Clothes() method in Chapter04.cs). 
Try it at least twice, with inputs 50 and then 80. 
As you can see, you get different results, depending on the input. 

.. code-block:: 
   :emphasize-lines: 21-24

   namespace IntroCSCS
   {

      class Chapter04
      {
         static void Main(string[] args)
         {
            // Rolla();
            // Weight();
            Clothes();
         }
      
         public static void Clothes()
         {
            Console.Write("What is the temperature? ");
            double temperature = double.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
            if (temperature > 70)
            {
               Console.WriteLine("Wear shorts.");
            }
            else
            {
               Console.WriteLine("Wear long pants.");
            }
            Console.WriteLine("Get some exercise outside.");
         }
      }
   }

.. note:: 
   You may see a warning in VS Code and when running the code as "warning CS8604: 
   Possible null reference argument for parameter 's' in 'double double.Parse(string s)'." 
   You can safely disregard the warning message. For more information, see `C# language reference <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/compiler-messages/nullable-warnings#possible-null-assigned-to-a-nonnullable-reference>`_
   Basically, C# compiler produces warning at that line because argument of Parse is marked as "non-nullable" and the compiler determined that the parameter input you are passing to that call can be null at the point of call.

After running the code, you see that the ``if-else`` statement allows you to choose 
which of the two code paths to follow based on a Boolean expression. 
In an |if-else| statement, an if statement is followed by an
``else`` statement that is only executed when the original ``if`` condition is *false*. 
Note that in an |if-else| statement, ``exactly one`` of two possible code blocks in braces is executed.

A final print line is also shown that is not indented, about getting exercise. 
The ``if`` and ``else`` clauses each 
only embed a *single* (possibly compound) statement
as option, so the last statement is not part of the |if-else|
statement. It is beyond the |if-else| statement. It is
just a part of the normal ``sequential``
flow of statements and therefore will be executed as part of the flow.  

.. Scope With Compound Statements
.. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. Just like the local scope in method bodies, 
.. which happen to be enclosed in braces, making the function body a *compound statement*.
.. In fact variables declared inside *any* compound statement have their scope restricted
.. to *inside* that compound statement.

.. As a result the following code makes no sense

..     static int BadBlockScope(int x) 
..     {
..        if ( x < 100) {
..           int val = x + 2;
..        }
..        else {
..           int val = x - 2:
..        }
..        return val;
..     }

.. The |if-else| statement is legal, but useless, 
.. because whichever compound statement gets executed,
.. ``val`` ceases being defined after the
.. closing brace of its compound statement, 
.. so the ``val`` in the return statement has
.. not been declared or given a value.  The code
.. would generate a compiler error. 
 
.. If we want ``val`` be used inside the braces and 
.. to make sense past the end of the compound statement,
.. it cannot be declared inside the braces. Instead it must be
.. declared before the compound statements that are parts of the 
.. ``if-else`` statement. A local variable in a function declared before a nested compound 
.. statement is still visible (in scope) *inside*  that compound statement.
.. The following would work:
       
.. [#f1] `The C# language reference <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/operators/equality-operators>`_ 
         says that the operators <, >, <= , and >= are comparison, also known as relational, 
         operators and they compare their operands. While "``equality operators``, the == and != 
         operators, check if their operands are equal or not.