.. index:: if-else-if
        
.. _Multiple-Tests:

``else-if`` Statements
======================

``if-else`` statements allow us to construct two alternative paths. 
A single condition determines which path will be followed. 
We can build more complex conditionals using an else if clause. 
These allow us to add additional conditions and code blocks, which 
facilitate more complex branching.


else-if Statements
---------------------

Comparing with the ``if-else`` statement, the ``else if`` statements specify 
a new condition to be tested if the first condition is False. 

The syntax for the ``else-if`` statement is::

    if (condition1)
    {
        // block of code to be executed if condition1 is True
    } 
    else if (condition2) 
    {
        // block of code to be executed if the condition1 is False and condition2 is True
    } 
    else
    {
        // block of code to be executed if the condition1 is False and condition2 is False
    }

Note that the logic of the flow terminate at ``else``: The ``else`` block is the 
default block when all the conditions are False. 

An example of else-if statement is::

    int x = 10;
    int y = 20;

    if (x > y)
    {
    Console.WriteLine("x is greater than y");
    }
    else if (x < y)
    {
    Console.WriteLine("x is less than y");
    }
    else
    {
    Console.WriteLine("x and y are equal");
    }
    

In the example above, the logic is that the three conditions can exhaust 
all possible alternatives. If the first condition is False, the next 
condition, in the else-if statement, will be tested. If the 2nd condition 
is also False, we then move on to the ``else`` statement, the **default** 
case, since condition1 and condition2 are both False.


The code below is a variation of the Weight() method. Consider this
fragment *without* a final ``else``::

    if (weight > 120) {
        Console.WriteLine("Sorry, we can not take a suitcase that heavy.");
    }
    else if (weight > 50) { 
        Console.WriteLine("There is a $25 charge for luggage that heavy.");
    }
    
As with a simple if statement, the else clause is optional in else-if statements. 
This code above only prints one of two lines if there is a
problem with the weight of the suitcase (> 50 or > 120). Nothing is printed if 
neither of the conditions is met, meaning the weight is not greater than 50. 


``else-if`` Statements for Cases
---------------------------------


Consider the following code, LetterGrade() method, for converting a 
numerical grade to a letter grade, 'A', 'B', 'C', 'D' or 'F', where 
the cutoffs for 'A', 'B', 'C', and 'D' are 90, 80, 70, and 60 
respectively. We repetitively nests the if statements in 
the else clauses. The code structure is legal but semantically unsound if 
we consider the grade letters to be a flat structure:

.. code-block:: 

    static char LetterGrade(double score)
    {
        char letter;
        if (score >= 90) {
            letter = 'A'; 
        }
        else {   // grade must be B, C, D or F 
            if (score >= 80) { 
                letter = 'B'; 
            }
            else { // grade must be C, D or F 
                if (score >= 70) { 
                letter = 'C'; 
                }
                else {   // grade must D or F 
                if (score >= 60) {
                    letter = 'D'; 
                }
                else { 
                    letter = 'F';
                }
                }   //end else D or F
            }      // end of else C, D, or F
        }         // end of else B, C, D or F
        return letter;
    }

As seen in the LetterGrade() method above, the repeatedly increasing indentation 
with an ``if`` statement in the ``else`` clause can be annoying and 
distracting. Here is a preferred
alternative in this situation, that avoids all this further
indentation:  
Combine each ``else`` and following ``if`` onto the same line, 
and note that the ``if`` part after each else is just a *single*
(possibly very complicated) statement.  This allows the elimination of
some of the braces and make the code more readable and logically clear:

| ``if (`` *condition1* ``) {``
|      statement-block-run-if-condition1-is-true;       
| ``}``  
| ``else if (`` *condition2* ``) {``
|      statement-block-run-if-condition2-is-the-first-true;       
| ``}``  
| ``else if (`` *condition3* ``) {``
|      statement-block-run-if-condition3-is-the-first-true;       
| ``}`` 
| // ...
| ``else {    //`` *no condition!* 
|      statement-block-run-if-no condition-is-true;       
| ``}`` 
    
Note that *exactly one* of the statement blocks gets executed:
- If some condition is true, the first block following a true condition is executed. 
- If no condition is true, the ``else`` block is executed. 
  
We can modify the LetterGrade() method into LetterGrade2() 
method, which is more readable and semantically sound:

    .. code-block:: csharp

        static char LetterGrade2(double score)
        {
            char letter;
            if (score >= 90) {
                letter = 'A'; 
            }
            else if (score >= 80) { 
                letter = 'B'; 
                }
            else if (score >= 70) { 
                letter = 'C'; 
            }
            else if (score >= 60) {
                letter = 'D'; 
            }
            else { 
                letter = 'F';
            }

            return letter;
        }






