.. index::
   single: &&; boolean operation AND
   and &&
   boolean operation; && AND

.. _Compound-Boolean-Expressions:
   
Compound Boolean Expressions
===============================

Logical Operators
--------------------

To be eligible to graduate from M S&T, you must
have 120 credits *and* a GPA of at least 2.0. C# does not use the
word *and*. Instead it uses ``&&`` (inherited from the C language).  
Then, the requirement translates directly into C# as a *compound condition* 
using the logical operator ``&&``::

	credits >= 120 && GPA >=2.0 

This is true if both ``credits >= 120`` is true and ``GPA >= 2.0`` 
is true. A short example function using this would be::

   static void checkGraduation(int credits, double GPA) 
   {
      if (credits >= 120 && GPA >=2.0) { 
         Console.WriteLine("You are eligible to graduate!"); 
      }
      else { 
         Console.WriteLine("You are not eligible to graduate."); 
      }
   }

The C# syntax for the logical operator ``&&`` is:

	*condition1* ``&&`` *condition2*

The compound condition is ``true`` if ``both`` of the component conditions
are true. It is ``false`` if ``at least one`` of the conditions is false.

Suppose we want a C# condition that is true in the same situations 
as the mathematical expression: low < val < high. Unfortunately the 
math is not a C# expression. The C# operator ``<`` is binary. 
In C#, the statement above is equivalent to 

    (low < val) < high

comparing a Boolean result to high, and causing a compiler error.
There is a C# version.  Be sure to use this pattern::

   low < val && val < high

.. index::
   single: ||; boolean operation OR
   or ||
   boolean operation; || OR

Now suppose we want the opposite condition:  that val is *not* 
strictly between low and high.
There are several approaches.  
One is that ``val`` would be less than or equal to low 
*or* greater than or equal to ``high``.  C# translate *or* into ``||``,
so a C# expression would be:

    val <= low || val >= high
    
The C# syntax for the logical operator ``||`` is:

	*condition1* ``||`` *condition2*

The compound condition is true if at least one of the component conditions
are true. It is false if both conditions are false.

.. index::
   single: ! boolean operation NOT
   not !
   boolean operation; ! NOT

Another logical way to express the opposite of the condition low < val < high
is that it is *not* the case
that low < val && val << high.  C# translates *not* as ``!``.  Another way
to state the condition would be ::

    !(low < val && val < high)

The parentheses are needed because the ``!`` 
operator has higher precedence than
``<``.

A way to remember this strange *not* operator is to think of the use of ``!``
in the not-equal operator: ``!=``   

The C# syntax for the operator ``!``:

	``!`` *condition* 

This whole expression is true when *condition* is false, 
and false when *condition* is true.

Because of the precedence of ``!``, you are often going to write:

	``!(`` *condition* ``)`` 

Remember when such a condition is used in an ``if`` statement, *outer*
parentheses are also needed:

	``if (!(`` *condition* ``)) {`` 
	
Note that ``!`` has the high precedence of unary arithmetic operators.
The operators ``&&`` and ``||`` are almost at the bottom of the operators 
considered in this book, just above the assignment operators, and below the
relational operators, with ``&&`` above ``||``. You are encourages to use 
parentheses to make sure.
	
**Compound Overkill**:  Look back to the code converting a score to a letter 
grade in the LetterGrade2 method, the condition before assigning the B 
grade could have been::

    (score >= 80 && score < 90)
    
That would have totally nailed the condition, but it is overly verbose in the
``if`` .. ``else if`` ... code where it appeared. Since you only get 
to consider a B as a grade if the grade was *not* already
set to A, the second part of the compound condition above is redundant.  


Compound test conditions
--------------------------

Consider a different situation: Steven Covey suggested that people classify 
possible actions on two axes: urgent vs. not urgent and important vs. not
important, leading to four possible combinations.  
We could ask a person to classify an activity this way, and them give a
process comment, something like from Covey's book:

* Important and urgent:  Be sure to schedule this promptly!
* Important and not urgent:  Make sure that this is included regularly in your 
  plans!  Do not let urgent but unimportant things interfere!
* Not important and urgent:  Can you skip this, or is it really worth 
  letting this displace important things you need to do?
* Not important and not urgent:  Is there anything more worthwhile 
  for you to do now?

Assume we have Boolean variables ``important`` and ``urgent``.
There are four separate combinations, and we could handle this with a
chain of compound conditions checking for one at a time::

   if (important && urgent) {
      Console.WriteLine("Be sure ...");
   }
   else if (important && !urgent) {
      Console.WriteLine("Make sure ...");
   }
   else if (!important && urgent) {
      Console.WriteLine("Can you...");
   }
   else {
      Console.WriteLine("Is there ...");
   }
   

Compound test conditions are not necessary if we keep track of partial 
answers by nesting ``if`` statements. Consider the two aspects separately 
using an if-else statement with nested if-else sub-statements::

   if (important) {
      if (urgent) {
         Console.WriteLine("Be sure ...");
      }
      else {
         Console.WriteLine("Make sure ...");
      }
   }
   else {
      if (urgent) {
         Console.WriteLine("Can you...");
      }
      else {
         Console.WriteLine("Is there ...");
      }
   }

The outer |if-else| determines whether the action is important, so the inner
conditions only need to deal with urgency.  Also note that in executing
this version there are never more than two short conditions evaluated.  
In the first version, you may have to go through all three conditions. 
Both approaches work. Which is clearer to you?



