Lab 04
===============

#. Create a dotnet console app project called Chapter04. 
#. The namespace of this project is not important at this point of 
   time but let us call it *IntroCSCS*. 
#. The class name of this project is *Chapter04*. 
#. You will only use the Main() method to execute the code, 
#. You will prepare methods in the same class to be called from the Main() method. 
#. Use a Word document to paste your screenshots; number and annotate 
   your answers. 

If you have problem creating the project, you need to catch up. Please 
work with the TA of the class during the help sessions.


Boolean Expressions
----------------------

- Use ``csharprepl`` to test the expressions below and write the 
  resulted output after the single-line comments at the right. 
- You may copy and paste the code below to VS Code or a Word document to 
  prepare the answers.
- Prepare a partial screenshot.  

.. code-block:: 

   int x = 5;  
   x;                      //
   x == 5;                 //
   x == 6;                 //
   x;                      //
   x != 6;                 //
   x = 6;                  
   6 == x;                 //
   6 != x;                 //
   "hi" == "h" + "i";      //
   "HI" != "hi";           //
   string s = "Hello";     
   string t = "HELLO";     
   s == t;                 //
   s.ToUpper() == t;       //


Simple ``if`` Exercise
----------------------

Think of two different inputs you could give that would make the
execution of the code fragment proceed differently. What would happen in
each case? (Assume we have access to the class UIF that prints the 
prompt line, intake the value input, and turn the input value into 
proper data type.) 

- Write your answer to your Word document directly under the question number. 

a. Consider::

       string v = UIF.PromptLine("Enter a word: ");
       if (v.Length > 3) {
          v = v + v;
       }
       Console.WriteLine("Now we have " + v);

#. Consider::

       int x = UIF.PromptInt("Enter a integer: ");
       Console.Write("The magnitude of " + x + " is ");
       if (x < 0) {
          x = -x;
       }
       Console.WriteLine(x);


``if-else`` Exercise
----------------------

Think of two different inputs you could give that would make the
execution of the code fragment proceed differently. What would happen in
each case? (Assume we have access to the class UIF. Google if you are 
not aware of what v.Length means.) 

- Write your answer to your Word document directly under the question 
  number (e.g., *x*.a).

a. Consider::

       string v = UIF.PromptLine("Enter a word: ");
       if (v.Length > 3) {
          v = v + v;
          Console.WriteLine("Now we have " + v);
       }
       else {
          Console.WriteLine("We still have " + v);
       }

#. Consider::

       int x = UIF.PromptInt("Enter a integer: ");
       Console.Write("The magnitude of " + x + " is ");
       if (x < 0) {
          Console.WriteLine(-x);
       }
       else {
          Console.WriteLine(x);
       }



Graduate Exercise
----------------------

Write a method, Graduation, that prompts students for how
many credits they have. Print whether of not they have enough
credits for graduation. (At M S&T, a minimum of 120 credit hours
are required for graduation.)


Calculate Weekly Wages
-------------------------

Given a person’s work hours for the week and regular hourly wage, 
calculate the total pay for the week, taking into account overtime. 
Hours worked over 40 are overtime, paid at 1.5 times the normal rate. 
This is a natural place for a method enclosing the calculation.

The problem clearly indicates two cases: when no more than 40
hours are worked or when more than 40 hours are worked. In case
more than 40 hours are worked, it is convenient to introduce a
variable overtimeHours. 

Please prepare a method in class Chapter04 called CalcWeeklyWages that 
would execute successfully and correctly when the following execution 
is performed in the Main() method of class Chapter04::

   // Calculate Wages
   Console.Write("Enter hours worked: ");
   double hours = double.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
   Console.Write("Enter dollars paid per hour: ");
   double wage = double.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
   double total = CalcWeeklyWages(hours, wage);
   Console.WriteLine(
      "Wages for {0} hours at ${1:F2} per hour are ${2:F2}.",
      hours, wage, total);

Note that: 

#. Two complete sample code can be found here:
   - https://github.com/mstbit/introcs-csharp-examples/blob/master/wages1/wages1.cs
   - https://github.com/mstbit/introcs-csharp-examples/blob/master/wages2/wages2.cs
#. When calling from Main(), do not forget to return from the method.
#. Suffix ``F`` means data type ``float`` and the number followed means decimal 
   places.



Congress Exercise
--------------------
   
A person is eligible to be a US Senator who is at least 30 years
old and has been a US citizen for at least 9 years. Write a version
of a program ``congress.cs`` to obtain age and length of
citizenship from the user and print out if a person is eligible to
be a Senator or not. A person is eligible to be a US Representative
who is at least 25 years old and has been a US citizen for at least
7 years. Elaborate your program ``congress.cs`` so it obtains age
and length of citizenship and prints whether a person is eligible
to be a US Representative only, or is eligible for both offices, or
is eligible for neither.

This exercise could be done by making an exhaustive treatment of all 
possible combinations of age and citizenship.  Try to avoid that.  
(Note the paragraph just before this exercise.)  

Caution:  be sure to do exhaustive testing.  It is easy to write code
that is correct for *some* inputs, but not all.

.. index:: implication operator

Implication Exercise
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We have introduced C# Boolean operators for AND, OR, and NOT. 
There are other Boolean operators important in logic, 
that are not directly given as a C# operator.  
One example is "implies", also expressed
in a logical if-then statement:  If I am expecting rain, then I am carrying an
umbrella.  Otherwise put:  "I am expecting rain" *implies* 
"I am carrying an umbrella". The first part is a Boolean expression called the
*hypothesis*, and the second part is called the *conclusion*.  In general, when
A and B are Boolean expressions, "A implies B" is also a Boolean expression.  

Just as the truth of a compound Boolean expression like "A and B" depends on the
truth value of the two parts, so with *implies*:
If you are using good logic, and you start with a true assertion, 
you should only be able to conclude something else true, so it is true that 
"true implies true".  If you start with garbage you can use that false statement
in a logical argument and end up with something either false or true:
"false implies false" and "false implies true" are both true. The only thing
that should not work is to start with something true and conclude 
something false.  If that were the case, logical arguments would be useless,
so "true implies false" is false.  There is no C# operator for "implies", but
you can check all four cases of Boolean values for A and B to see that 
"A implies B" is true exactly when "not A or B" is true.  We can 
express this in C# as ``!A || B``.  

So here is a silly little exercise illustrating both implication and using
the C# Boolean operators:  Ask the user whether "I am expecting rain" is true.
(We have the UI function Agree.)  Then check with the user whether 
"I am carrying an umbrella."  Then conclude and print out 
whether the implication "If I am expecting rain, then I am carrying an
umbrella." is true or not in this situation.